Title: Policy in Perspective: 2022
Date: unknown
URL: https://hiappleseed.org/publications/policy-in-perspective-2022
PDF: https://hiappleseed.org/s/Policy-In-Perspective-2022_FINAL.pdf
============================================================

H AWA I‘I   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

POLICY

I

N

PERSPECTIVE

LOOKING FORWARD FROM THE 2022 STATE LEGISLATIVE SESSION

 
H AWA I‘I   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

Author: Will Caron

Hawaiʻi Appleseed envisions a Hawaiʻi that puts its people first—a Hawaiʻi where everyone can meet their 
basic needs while living happy, healthy and creative lives. We advocate for economic justice for and with 
Hawaiʻi’s people.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary

Policy Wins 

•  Minimum Wage & the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)
•  Housing

Difference-Makers

•  Sufficient Revenue
•  Political Pressure
•  Coalition Collaboration
•  Centering Community Voices

Recommendations

Endnotes

3

5

5
11

14

15 
19
20
20

22

23

Copyright © 2022 Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice. All rights reserved. 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1180, Honolulu, HI 96813

2 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

AN ECONOMY THAT HELPS EVERYONE in Hawaiʻi 
thrive is possible. The economic forces that shape 
our communities aren’t natural phenomena out of 
our control. Rather, they were created through policy 
choices. That means policymakers can alter and 
improve the rules by which the economy operates 
so that it delivers the opportunity for everyone to 
meet their basic needs and live happy, healthy and 
creative lives. 

And yet, today, we have an economy that too often 
fails to achieve this outcome. Instead, policy choices 
can reinforce systemic barriers that prevent many in 
Hawaiʻi from accessing this promised opportunity. 
We should collectively strive to craft policies that 
dismantle those barriers. Doing so would create a 
more equitable society and a healthier community 
here in the Hawaiian Islands.

Finding the path through the legislative process to 
successfully implement these policies requires the 
joint efforts of concerned community members, 
community-based organizations, businesses, 
researchers and government officials who share in 
this vision of a local economy that democratizes its 
prosperity to all, and not just the few.

The 2022 Hawaiʻi legislative session included 
extraordinary examples of the types of actions 
policymakers can take to rewrite the economic 
rulebook. Highlights from the session include:

•  Raising the minimum wage to $18 by 2028, 
which is projected to generate $1 billion in 
additional wages to over 200,000 workers each 
year, increasing the annual income of minimum 

wage workers by $16,400 (up from the $21,000 they 
currently earn) (HB2510); 

•  Expanding and making permanent Hawaiʻi’s 
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), a wage 
supplement that will reach some 100,000 
households each year, providing a total of $40 
million, annually, targeted toward struggling 
working families with children (HB2510); 

•  Appropriating $600 million for the Hawaiʻi 
State Department of Hawaiian Homelands 
(DHHL) to address Hawaiʻi’s affordable housing 
crisis starting with Hawaiian Homeland 
beneficiaries, many of whom have been waiting 
decades for a homestead (HB2511); 

•  Creating a $500 per month housing subsidy for 
low-income families using $23 million in unused 
federal Temporary Assistance for Need Families 
(TANF) funds (HB2233); 

•  Creating protections from discrimination 

against families that rely on Section 8 vouchers to 
help pay for their housing (SB206), and creating an 
incentive program for landlords to participate in 
Section 8 (HB1752); and 

•  Combatting houselessness through extension 
of the ʻOhana Zones Program and provision of 
regulatory exemptions for permanent supportive 
housing (HB2512).

Changes of this magnitude are rare, but they need 
not be. The purpose of this report is to review the 
2022 legislative session to better understand these 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 3

 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

outcomes. What worked well in achieving them? And 
where do we still need to improve so we can continue 
to reshape our economy into one that is more robust, 
sustainable, and supportive of all of Hawaiʻi’s people? 

Our 2021 Policy in Perspective report identified the 
need for “a dramatic shift in our public policy that is 
capable of bringing forth transformational change 
in our economic and social systems.” That report 
concluded that 2021 was “a serious missed opportunity 
for addressing the deep flaws in our system.” For this 
year’s report, we are focused on what was different 
about 2022 that facilitated a much more productive 
legislative session so that we can continue to build on 
the foundation for change that has been established. 

So why was the 2022 legislative session so much more 
successful than other previous sessions? Our analysis 
has four main takeaways:

1.  Sufficient revenue helps policymakers turn 
long-discussed ideas into action. The more 
than $6 billion in federal pandemic relief funds 
allocated to the state and counties bolstered 
Hawaiʻi’s economy, giving state legislators the 
ability to invest the large sums of money necessary 
to patch Hawaiʻi’s badly-frayed social safety net 
and help working families deal with our high cost 
of living.1 Rather than wait and hope for federal 
dollars, Hawaiʻi can transform its state and county 
tax codes to provide a steady revenue stream 
while alleviating costs to working families and 
stimulating the economy. 

2.  Political pressure makes a difference. 2022 is a 
major election year in which every state legislator 
is up for reelection due to redistricting.2 With 
Hawaiʻi’s soaring cost of living top of mind with a 
pandemic-weary population, politicians in every 
legislative district want to be able to say they 
delivered economic relief to a growing number of 
struggling voters.3 

4 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

Living wage 
supporters sign-
wave outside the 
capitol building. 
// Will Caron

3.  Sustained coalition efforts are necessary. 

Because it often takes years to get 
transformational policy fixes through the 
legislature, coalitions of organizations and 
people can help sustain the effort. Collaboration 
with other advocates can help focus messaging 
around an issue and drive cohesive campaign 
efforts efficiently, transferring community energy 
into legislative success. Seeking unconventional 
allies and broadening the range of support for an 
issue can make coalitions more effective. 

4.  Centering impacted communities is critical 
to success. Building meaningful relationships 
with everyday working families, bringing them 
into the policy process, and centering their 
voice enables us to cut through the distraction 
and disinformation presented by opponents of 
change. Data can show why change is needed and 
why policies make sense, but it’s the people that 
these policies impact that can show lawmakers—
viscerally—why these policy changes matter, and 
how urgently they are needed. In the end, it’s 
people power that drives policy change forward, 
so putting people first is essential.

POLICY WINS

Community members pose for 
a group shot on the final day of 
community action to support the 
minimum wage and EITC policy 
proposals. // Will Caron

MINIMUM WAGE & THE EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT (EITC)

Background on the policies: The EITC and minimum wage are two different, but complementary approaches 
to helping ensure Hawaiʻi’s working families can afford to put food on the table and keep a roof over their heads 
in the immediate future. 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 5

POLICY WINS

Hawaiʻi workers are faced with the largest gap in the country between the median wages earned and the cost of 
living.4 Based on Hawaiʻi State Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism (DBEDT) estimates 
adjusted for inflation, a single worker with no children needed to earn at least $19.56 per hour at the outset of 
2022 just to cover their basic needs, and that’s on the low end of living wage estimates for Hawaiʻi.5 

In 2018, the final step in the previous minimum wage increase law brought Hawaiʻi’s minimum wage workers up 
to $10.10 an hour.6 That means, working full time, a minimum wage earner in Hawaiʻi was making just $21,000 
a year. In the state with the highest cost of living, it was impossible for even a single adult with no children to 
survive on that amount. 

Since 2018, Hawaiʻi’s legislature left the minimum wage to stagnate for years without an increase, allowing 
inflation to erode wages that were already insufficient to live on. Advocates began fighting for a new bill to 
increase the minimum wage even before 2018 and have returned every year since, hoping to push the state into 
doing more than simply keeping up with inflation. Rather, the goal has been to start closing some of the gap 
between wages and rising cost of living here in Hawaiʻi, with the ultimate aim of achieving a minimum wage that 
is a true living wage.

The federal EITC has long acted as a wage supplement for families that are working, but not earning enough to 
meet their basic needs, including many minimum wage earners. The tax credit reduces or eliminates workers’ 
tax liability.

Because the EITC is targeted at families with children, it is particularly effective at alleviating the impact of child 
poverty. About 18,000 children in Hawaiʻi are kept out of poverty due to the federal EITC each year.7 This tax 
credit offers working families a hand up by encouraging and supporting work, and by letting workers keep more 
of what they earn.

In 2017, the Hawaiʻi State Legislature passed a bill establishing a state-level EITC, providing an additional 20 
percent of the value of the federal EITC for eligible families. However, unlike the federal credit, the state credit 
was made to be “non-refundable,” which ultimately means that the workers paid the lowest wages are unable to 
take full advantage of the state level credit. 

The legislature also set the EITC to expire at the end of 2022.8 Advocates have been working ever since 2017 
to expand the EITC to make it both permanent and refundable, which would ensure stability and double the 
cumulative value of the credit, from roughly $20 million per year to $41 million—with most of the additional 
benefit going to the lowest wage workers who need the most support.9

The EITC is a modest investment that can make a big difference in the lives of working families. But, on its own, 
it carries the risk of serving as a subsidy for low-paying employers. As it works to support low-income working 
families, this could potentially enable employers to pay sub-living wages to their employees, relying on the 
public to provide the additional support necessary for their workers to survive. Coupling the EITC with a robust 
minimum wage—one that brings us closer to a true living wage—helps to mitigate this issue while ensuring that 
someone working 40 hours a week is better able to make ends meet.  

6 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

POLICY WINS

Union members gather in support of a minimum wage increase. 
// Will Caron

The Hawai‘i Tax Fairness Coalition 

Created ahead of the 2017 legislative session, the Hawaiʻi Tax Fairness Coalition was the driving 
force outside the legislature for supporting passage of the original state EITC program. 

Since then, the coalition has continued to push for changes to make the state tax system more 
equitable, and more effective at delivering the revenue needed for critical state investments in 
working families. That means putting more money into the pockets of working class families 
through tax credits like the EITC, and increasing taxes on high-income earners and corporations 
who currently pay a lower effective tax rate than the working class. The dual action of these two 
kinds of tax fairness policies would simultaneously boost the economy through increased consumer 
spending, and deliver the kind of steady revenue stream needed to transform our economy into one 
that works for everyone.

This became the focus of the coalition during the 2021 legislative session, when it proposed a suite 
of tax fairness bills aimed at raising revenue from the wealthy and corporations, in a variety of 
equitable ways, to help prevent cuts to programs for working families that were desperately needed 
during the pandemic, and to lay the groundwork for future investments.10 The life-saving influx of 
federal funding preserved and temporarily expanded needed programs, but it also lessened the 
urgency around making the tax code changes necessary for Hawaiʻi’s prosperity over the long term. 
The legislature did not pass a single coalition proposal that year. 

With the state’s non-refundable EITC program set to expire at the end of 2022, the coalition switched 
gears and concentrated its efforts on making sure the legislature committed to making this critical 
working families tax credit permanent and expanding it so the workers most in need have access to 
its full benefits.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 7

POLICY WINS

Raise Up Hawai‘i

Created ahead of the 2019 legislative session, the Raise Up Hawaiʻi coalition coordinated the effort 
to raise the state minimum wage after its last increase capped out at $10.10 in January of 2018. It 
was clear that there was a need for a broad and unified coalition to come together around the idea 
that workers should be able to earn enough to put food on the table and a roof over their heads.

In 2019, Raise Up Hawaiʻi pushed for a $17 minimum wage increase by 2024 to match the State 
Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism (DBEDT)’s inflation-adjusted self-
sufficiency standard for 2016.11 

A bill that would have raised the minimum wage to $13 by 2024 for businesses that provide 
employer-sponsored health insurance and $15 for businesses that do not, made it all the way to a 
conference committee. There, legislators balked at last minute concerns raised by the Department 
of Labor and Industrial Relations (DLIR), which testified for the first time in the process during this 
hearing that the healthcare carve out might invite legal challenges.12 

In 2020, Raise Up Hawaiʻi was back with the same demand: $17 by 2024. In response, both chambers 
of the legislature and Governor David Ige got together to announce a working families package of 
bills that would include both an EITC expansion and a minimum wage increase—though only up to 
$13 by 2024—as well as several hundred million dollars in housing investments.13 

Then, before Raise Up Hawaiʻi could even begin to organize in support of a better deal for workers, 
the COVID-19 pandemic struck, and legislative leadership scrapped their entire working families 
package over concerns about the economy and a potential budget deficit.

In 2021, with uncertainty over the pandemic still a major factor in the legislative outlook, a proposal 
to raise the minimum wage to $12 in one step beginning in 2022 failed to get even a single hearing in 
the State House labor committee.

Movement through the legislative process: Multiple bills concerning the EITC and minimum wage were 
introduced at the legislature in 2022. In the end, both policies were implemented through the same bill—
HB2510—but the path legislators took to arrive there was anything but straightforward.

First, the Senate demonstrated strong support for a robust minimum wage increase by passing Senate labor 
committee chair Brian Taniguchi’s bill–SB2018–within just 10 days of the start of the legislative session. The 
bill—which proposed to bring the state minimum wage up to $18 by 2026 in four steps—passed through two 
Senate committees and a 24–1 Senate floor vote. 

8 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

POLICY WINS

House labor chair Richard Onishi never scheduled SB2018 for a hearing. Instead—more than two weeks after 
SB2018 arrived in the House, Rep. Onishi finally heard the House’s first and only minimum wage bill considered 
during the session. 

The bill, HB2510, was a House leadership omnibus bill that contained three proposed tax credit expansions (to 
the low-income renters credit, the food/excise credit, and the EITC), as well as a much slower minimum wage 
increase up to $18 by 2030 reluctantly supported by business industry lobbyists. The wage increase also came 
paired with an increase in the tip penalty—the amount employers are allowed to deduct from their tipped 
employee’s paychecks.

In response to the weak minimum wage proposal in HB2510, advocates from Raise Up Hawaiʻi organized more 
than 100 pieces of testimony and thousands of emails to legislators insisting that the $18 by 2030 wage increase 
schedule was too slow, and that a tip penalty expansion would harm Hawaiʻi’s working people. Because the 
bill did include an expansion of the EITC, advocates coordinated with Hawaiʻi Tax Fairness to make sure that 
messaging included support for the tax credit portion of the bill.

Representative Onishi ultimately passed out an amended version of the bill that made none of the changes 
advocates requested, except to add in a provision that would have required automatic annual minimum 
wage adjustments after 2030. However, when the bill reached House finance committee chair Sylvia Luke, the 
beginnings of a true compromise began to emerge. Representative Luke removed two of the tax credits from the 
bill (to avoid snags in some of the tax credit language that threatened to sink the whole bill), but left the EITC 
expansion intact. She also accelerated the wage increase schedule to $18 by 2028, over the objections of the 
business lobby, but left the tip penalty increase intact as well. 

In the meantime, on the Senate side, although there was strong support for a robust minimum wage increase, 
none of the EITC bills introduced in the Senate were passed out of the chamber. After the House passed a bill 
(HB1507) that would have made the EITC refundable and permanent, while also eliminating the special tax rate 
on capital gains by treating it as regular income, the Senate never scheduled it for a hearing. 

Once the Senate received the amended HB2510 from the House—which included both EITC and a minimum 
wage increase to $18 by 2028, Senate labor committee chair Taniguchi removed all mention of the EITC. He also 
replaced the House’s wage increase schedule with the schedule from his own SB2018, which the House had 
refused to hear. And he went even further, reversing the House proposal to increase the tip penalty and, instead, 
inserting language to completely phase-out the existing tip penalty by 2026. 

With the legislative session entering its final stages, the apparent lack of support for the EITC expansion within 
the Senate became a concern to advocates in the Hawaiʻi Tax Fairness Coalition. It began to look as if the Senate 
might be unwilling to advance any EITC proposal at all. Instead, it appeared that EITC had become a bargaining 
chip in the battle between the House and Senate around minimum wage, with the Senate using the threat of not 
passing EITC as leverage to get a more robust minimum wage than the watered-down minimum wage increase 
preferred by the House. 

In one of the few remaining opportunities to influence the outcome on HB2510—the most likely vehicle for 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 9

POLICY WINS

Kaua‘i community 
members gather in Līhu‘e 
to demand a minimum 
wage increase. // Courtesy 
Raise Up Hawai‘i

passing both the EITC proposal and a minimum wage increase—the Hawaiʻi Tax Fairness called on the Senate 
Way & Means committee, chaired by Sen. Donovan Dela Cruz, to restore the EITC component, but the committee 
took no such action. Four days later, the full chamber approved the Senate version of HB2510, which focused 
solely on minimum wage, with 24 ayes (one with reservations from Senator Glenn Wakai) and one no vote (from 
Senator Gil Riviere).

Since the Senate had completely changed the House’s bill (while the House had refused to hear the Senate’s at 
all), a new compromise would need to be reached in a conference committee consisting of representatives from 
both chambers. If lawmakers failed to reach such a compromise, all hope for either a wage increase or an EITC 
expansion would die for the fourth year in a row. 

For Hawaiʻi’s struggling working families, this would be a disaster for obvious reasons. In a major election year 
though, failure to pass these policies could be disastrous for politicians as well. With advocates successfully 
focusing media and public attention onto the issue, such a failure would be abundantly clear to all. Fortunately, 
with diplomatic support from key lawmakers, a compromise was worked out the night before the deadline. 

The compromise bill would, in the end, reinstate the House minimum wage schedule of $18 by 2028. It would 
also increase the tip penalty, but by less than the House had originally proposed. And the expanded EITC 
language was salvaged and placed back into the bill. Together, these components delivered an imperfect bill 
that was nevertheless a significant win for Hawaiʻi’s working families in the area of affordability and fighting the 
high cost of living. 

Crucially, in 2028, this legislation will put Hawaiʻi’s low-wage workers closer to a true living wage, closing the gap 
between cost of living and wages by somewhere just shy of 50 percent.14

10 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

POLICY WINS

HOUSING

While the minimum wage and EITC policies address the problem of inadequate income for working families to 
survive on right now, in the longer term, it is critical that we also bring down the cost of living. And there’s no 
bigger contributor to our highest-in-the-nation cost of living than our housing costs, which are three times the 
national average.15

Advocates have been sounding the alarm about our out-of-control housing crisis for years and have urged the 
legislature to make concerted, consistent efforts to invest heavily in affordable housing development, along with 
a wide range of supports that can stabilize and begin to reduce our housing costs.16 17  In 2022, the legislature 
took a significant step forward through the passage of four separate reforms.

Investment in Hawaiian Homelands: A pair of companion bills (HB2511/SB3359) represented the proposed 
investment of $600 million in public funds for Native Hawaiian beneficiaries through DHHL. As signaled by the 
huge number of introducers attached to both bills (46 representatives—every single Democrat in the House; and 
17 of 25 Senators, including its lone Republican), this proposal was a top priority for the legislature, was widely 
discussed in the media throughout the legislative process, and was highly visible to the public. 

Coming off the heels of a 2020 article by Star-Advertiser reporter Rob Perez and ProPublica reporter Agnel 
Philip,18 which brought national attention to the severe backlog of Hawaiian Homelands beneficiaries and the 
state’s failure to live up to its fiduciary duties in managing the trust, the commitment to invest heavily in DHHL 
also coincided with the state’s decision to finally settle a 23-year-old lawsuit regarding this same failure.19 While 
the money—collectively close to $1 billion—only begins to make up for the harm caused by the colonization of 
the Hawaiian Islands by the United States, Leone Kalima, a lead plaintiff in the lawsuit, said it has the potential 
to “change thousands of lives.”20

Transitional housing support: A number of bills looked at the concept of ʻOhana Zones, or kauhale-style 
communities, as an important component in the continuum of strategies needed to address the houselessness 
crisis in Hawaiʻi. One of the critical elements of a comprehensive housing plan is transitional housing—simple 
shelters that help stabilize people dealing with housing insecurity. 

The ongoing success of communities like Puʻuhonua o Waiʻanae demonstrate the importance of this part of 
the continuum of policy needed to address housing and homelessness.21 Yet, current law makes it difficult to 
replicate that success.

Out of the multiple bills introduced on this topic, advocates—particularly those with lived experience with 
housing insecurity and houselessness—preferred SB3018, which would have established a statewide program 
for kauhale. Kauhale are small homes organized around services and shared communal living, modeled off of 
initiatives like Puʻuhonua o Waiʻanae. 

Importantly, SB3018 would have also made the wise decision to establish a community council to inform the 
development of transitional housing, with seats reserved for people with lived houselessness experience. 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 11

POLICY WINS

Community advocates meet to discuss housing policy and legislative strategy ahead of the 2023 legislative session. // Kenna StormoGipson

Puʻuhonua o Waiʻanae, afterall, wasn’t a state initiative. It was built from the grassroots up by the people 
impacted by houselessness themselves, taking charge and filling the need that they saw around them in their 
community. Those are the people who know best what works and what doesn’t when it comes to transitional 
housing, and the bill included an opportunity to put that people-first approach practice into law.

The bill that ended up passing, however, was HB2512. Although it did not include the community council 
proposal, it did include some improved kauhale language that was inserted thanks to the testimony and 
recommendations of advocates.

Rental assistance support: Rental housing assistance—in the form of vouchers or other subsidies—can help 
many of our low- and very low-income households to obtain and keep a rental unit while staying within their 
community. However, once households receive vouchers they often have a difficult time finding landlords and 

12 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

POLICY WINS

property managers who will allow them to apply for rental units. As a result, many families that have secured a 
subsidy lose it simply because they are unable to find a rental that will accept their voucher. 

Many advertisements for rentals include language such as “No vouchers” or “No Section 8.” These types of 
practices are called rental source of income (SOI) discrimination, or discrimination based on where a person’s 
rental money comes from (i.e., in part or in full from a voucher or subsidy). 

Exclusionary practices based on a household’s voucher status keeps people houseless or living in situations of 
housing instability for longer, and contributes to households losing vouchers they may have been waiting for 
years to receive. Prohibiting SOI discrimination in Hawaiʻi would help to level the playing field and would give 
households with rental assistance a better chance at getting into safe and stable housing.

After failing to pass a bill addressing SOI discrimination in 2021, the legislature passed two bills this year. HB1752 
creates a housing choice voucher landlord incentive program to encourage more landlords to see housing 
vouchers as assets, not liabilities, when it comes to covering rent. Indeed, the vouchers represent guaranteed 
rental income from the government. 

However, many landlords carry a negative stigma that voucher recipients will be bad tenants, simply because 
they are low-income. And some landlords are concerned that participation in the Section 8 program could 
add more cumbersome processes to renting their unit. HB1752 creates financial incentives to mitigate these 
concerns and encourage landlords to participate.

The stigma associated with voucher holders is evident in some of the many advertisements for rentals in 
Hawaiʻi that explicitly state “No Section 8.” The second bill to pass, SB206, bans discrimination—including in 
advertisements for rental property—in rental transactions based on participation in a section 8 housing choice 
program or any permanent supportive housing program or requirements related to participation in these 
housing assistance programs.

The hope is that, together, these policies will work toward greater acceptance of vouchers by landlords, which 
will lead to greater success in voucher holders actually being able to use their benefits and find a home.

Direct housing subsidies: A pair of companion bills (HB2233/SB2150) designed to expand benefits for 
Temporary Assistance for Need Families (TANF) and Temporary Assistance for Other Need Families (TAONF, 
which covers Compact of Free Association migrant families, for example) signaled the legislature’s recognition of 
the importance of keeping people housed, and not letting struggling families slip into houselessness. 

In recent years, Hawaiʻi had accumulated the nation’s largest unspent balance of TANF funds, which are 
intended to help provide families a pathway out of poverty. Recognizing the benefit of getting these funds into 
the hands of the people that need them, the bills proposed to create a new $500 per month housing subsidy for 
TANF recipients. By alleviating some of the high costs of housing that keep many families struggling on the edge 
of eviction, an additional $500 per month to put toward shelter would go a long way toward stabilizing this at-
risk population. The legislature ended up sending HB2233 to Governor Ige, who signed the bill on July 6, 2022.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 13

DIFFERENCE-MAKERS

Community support for the 
minimum wage increase from 
across the islands. // Courtesy

Just one year after a legislative session in which lawmakers passed up multiple opportunities to make life easier 
for working families struggling through the midst of a pandemic-recession, the 2022 legislative session resulted 
in extraordinary progress by comparison.

What made the difference this year? What can we do differently in the coming years to continue to further this 
trend of lawmakers taking the big steps forward we need to transform Hawaiʻi in a way that makes these islands 
a place where we all can thrive? Four factors came together to make the 2022 legislative session a success for 
working families and for our collective economic recovery and prosperity.

14 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

SUFFICIENT REVENUE

The Great Recession (2007–09) caused Hawaiʻi’s unemployment rate to rise from 2.7 percent to a high of 7 
percent, representing 43,850 jobs.22 By contrast, the Pandemic Recession saw Hawaiʻi’s unemployment rate 
jump tenfold from 2.7 percent to 28.3 percent (as of April 18, 2020), representing some 185,146 jobs.23 Not only 
that, but the Pandemic Recession fell much harder on groups with lower earnings, increasing the gap between 
lower-income and higher-income households.24

The Pandemic Recession Hit Groups with Lower Average Earnings Harder

Figure 1. The Pandemic Recession Hit Groups with Lower Average Earnings Harder

72%

47%

55%

36%

31%

39%

20%

19%

18%

21%

Job Losses, 
Low-Paying 
Occupations

Job Losses, 
High-Paying 
Occupations

Job Losses, 
Women

Job Losses, 
Filipinos

Job Losses, 
Native 
Hawaiians

Pandemic Recession

Great Recession (2007–2009)

Figure 1. The Pandemic 
Recession increased the gap 
between lower-income and 
higher-income households. 
Compared to the Great 
Recession, its effects have 
been more harmful to groups 
with lower earnings.

The more than $6 billion in federal pandemic relief funds allocated to the state and counties provided critical 
support for government programs threatened by budget cuts in the immediate wake of the pandemic-driven 
recession.25 These programs were essential to helping Hawaiʻi families weather the Great Recession, and would 
be even more important during the Pandemic Recession.26

The federal relief money also bolstered Hawaiʻi’s economy, generating a larger than expected27 28 revenue 
bump to the state. This, in turn, gave state legislators the ability to go big and pass policies that would make 
meaningful progress in supporting Hawaiʻi’s working families—many of whom were already struggling before 
the Pandemic Recession.29

“When given the opportunity due to increased revenues, we provided the largest total appropriation in history 
of our state for the benefit of Native Hawaiians,” said House finance committee chair Sylvia Luke in her speech in 
support of the 2022 state budget bill (HB1600).

In that same speech, the finance chair lists multiple other investments the legislature was able to make because 
of the tax revenues boost generated by an economy kept moving through government spending:

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 15

DIFFERENCE-MAKERS

•  The $600 million in DHHL funding to purchase lands and provide down payment and rent subsidies for 

individuals on its waitlist, along with the $328 million Kalima case settlement, and an additional $10 million 
for homestead services and $20 million for lot development. 

•  Boosting the pro rata share of ceded land revenues to the Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) from $15.1 million 

to $21.5 million and providing an $84 million retroactive payment to the agency. 

•  A $300 million appropriation to build rental housing and $23 million for direct housing subsidies. 

•  Although not given a figure in Luke’s speech, the EITC expansion (estimated to cost $41 million),30 along with 

the cost to provide one-time $100–300 rebates for most Hawaiʻi taxpayers. 

•  More than $200 million in early-learning investments, in particular to build new preschools.

Together, these investments will help thousands of Hawaiʻi families build a foundation for a prosperous future 
here in the islands—something that will only continue to drive the cycle of growing prosperity and extend its 
reach to more and more people.

But we don’t need to wait for federal funding to continue this work; nor should we. Instead, we should rework 
our state and local tax system so that it provides a stable revenue stream for continued community investments, 
while simultaneously reducing the cost to working families at tax time and further stimulating the consumer 
sectors of the economy. Here are just a few potential means of increasing revenue to bolster investments in 
Hawaiʻi’s well-being:31

•  Raise income taxes on the richest Hawaiʻi residents. Hawaiʻi’s top 1 percent earn more than $557,600 
per year, with an average income of about $1.3 million. The federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act gave each of 
them an average federal income tax break of $35,460 in 2020 for an estimated federal tax savings totaling 
$253 million. 

If Hawaiʻi’s millionaires, top 1 percent, or top 2 percent were subject to higher personal income tax rates, we 
could raise between $12.6–$100.2 million in additional revenues per year. 

•  Phase-out low tax rates for the richest Hawaiʻi residents. Hawaiʻi currently allows its wealthiest 

households to benefit from the lower tax brackets designed to benefit middle and lower-income residents. 
While Hawaiʻi’s top marginal tax rate of 11 percent kicks in at $200,000 for a single taxpayer and $400,000 
for married couples filing jointly, these households do not pay 11 percent tax on all of their income. Even 
multimillionaires benefit by having the first $400,000 they earn in any given year taxed at the state’s lower 
rates of 1.4 percent to 10 percent. 

Three states—Arkansas, Connecticut and New York—have made their tax systems more fair by gradually 
phasing out these lower rates for the very richest taxpayers. Adopting a similar approach in Hawaiʻi would 
raise $18.5–$153.9 million in additional tax revenues.

16 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

 
 
DIFFERENCE-MAKERS

•  Tax investments the same way regular income is taxed. Hawaiʻi is one of only nine states that allows all 
capital gains—profits from the sale of stocks, bonds, investment real estate, art, and antiques—to be taxed 
at a lower rate than ordinary income. That’s a tax break that goes almost entirely to high-income taxpayers, 
including non-residents who profit from investing in real estate in Hawaiʻi. 

Long-term capital gains constitute 10 percent of total taxable income in the state, or nearly $3.5 billion in 
2017. If those capital gains were taxed at regular individual income tax rates, the state would bring in about 
$80.2 million in new revenue. 

• 

Increase taxes on wealthy inheritances. The federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act gave a tremendous tax break to 
the richest among us, shielding $11 million-worth ($22 million for couples) of property transferred from the 
deceased to their heirs from taxation. 

Among the states that have estate taxes, Hawaiʻi has the fourth-highest exemption amount of $5.5 million 
($11 million of couples). The exemption amount was only $675,000 in 2001, or less than one-eighth of the 
exempted amount today. If Hawaiʻi’s estate tax exemption were dropped to between $1 million and $3.5 
million, that would generate between $6.6–$18.3 million in additional taxes per year. 

•  Raise corporate taxes. The federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act cut the federal corporate income tax rate by 14 
percentage points, from 35 percent to 21 percent, so companies are getting a large tax break at the federal 
level. Hawaiʻi’s current top corporate tax rate of 6.4 percent is below the median of the states. We are ranked 
34th among states in per capita corporate tax collections, at $103 per person, while the top state, New 
Hampshire, collects $582 per person. 

If Hawaiʻi were to have a single tax rate on corporate profits of between 6.4 and 10 percent, it would raise an 
additional $2.9–$103 million in revenue per year. It is estimated that nearly 60 percent of Hawaiʻi’s corporate 
income tax is paid by non-residents. 

•  Make global corporations pay taxes in Hawaiʻi. Corporations use complicated schemes to shift earnings to 
subsidiaries in offshore tax havens—countries with minimal or no taxes—in order to reduce their tax liability 
by billions of dollars. The result is that large multinationals have an unfair advantage, avoiding taxes that 
small local competitors must pay. 

Worldwide combined reporting requires a corporation to report their total global profits and the 
portion of their overall business activity in a given jurisdiction. So if a state makes up 2 percent of a 
company’s global business, then 2 percent of their taxable profit would be subject to state tax. If Hawaiʻi 
adopted worldwide combined reporting, it would collect an additional $38 million per year from large 
multinational corporations. 

•  Make REITS pay their fair share of taxes. Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) own approximately $17 
billion worth of Hawaiʻi real estate and earn about $1 billion in profits every year. Hawaiʻi REITs should be 
taxed, as is every other individual and corporation doing business in Hawaiʻi. 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 17

 
 
 
 
DIFFERENCE-MAKERS

While Hawaiʻi has more land value tied up in REITs than any other state in the nation, relatively few Hawaiʻi 
residents own shares in REITs—we rank 40th in the nation for the number of REIT shareholders as a 
percentage of the population. As a result, not only is income produced on Hawaiʻi property leaving the state, 
but the income that is funneled out of the state is not getting taxed here either.  

If REITs paid regular corporate taxes on their profits, that would mean $60 million in potential tax revenue 
every year. 

• 

Increase taxes on the sales of mansions. Real estate is one of the few sectors of Hawaiʻi’s economy that 
boomed during the pandemic, with median home prices in Hawaiʻi increasing by 22 percent between 2020 
and 2021.32 

However, sellers of high end properties are not paying their fair tax share in taxes. Our current real estate 
conveyance tax rates are only 0.50–1.25 percent on multi-million dollar mansions. We should not allow 
our real estate to be sold at such high prices with such low tax returns. If the conveyance tax were raised 
on properties valued at $2 million and above, that would mean a boost of $17–$45.4 million to the state’s 
treasury. And if the tax were raised on properties valued at $1 million and above, that would generate up to 
$71.5 million.  

Furthermore, it is estimated that roughly half, if not more, of the revenue would be generated from out of 
state residents. In fact, between January 2019 and September 2020, just over half (52 percent) of homes 
priced at or above $2 million were sold to non-Hawaiʻi residents. And of homes worth at least $4 million, 62 
percent were sold to non-Hawaiʻi residents. 

•  Tax vaping and increase other tobacco taxes. The rise of vaping and use of e-cigarettes among Hawaiʻi’s 
youth has erased decades of tobacco prevention and control progress. There is currently no state tobacco 
tax attached to e-cigarette products, making these lower-priced tobacco alternatives more appealing to 
youth even though their use carries health risks. Research has shown that increasing prices, such as through 
cigarette taxes, is proven to reduce the rate of smoking by adult and youth smokers. 

About 25 states have imposed taxes on e-cigarette products. An ad valorem tax on e-cigarette products has 
been considered by the Hawaiʻi legislature in recent years. Projected revenue at 95 percent of the wholesale 
price based on milliliters sold could generate revenue of around $8.2 million. 

Similarly, increasing the taxes on cigarettes, which has remained stagnant in the last 10 years, would raise 
an additional $12.9–$15.9 million in new tax revenues per year. Currently, no tobacco taxes are allocated 
to address tobacco prevention, and revenue from new tobacco taxes could be spent on programs and 
resources for youth tobacco prevention and cessation. 

•  Together, these revenue-generating tax code reforms could provide the state between $500 million and 

$1 billion in additional annual revenue to invest back into Hawaiʻi’s people, economy and environment.33 
And these are just some of the possibilities. It is within our ability to generate the resources that can fund 
investments which will make a dramatic difference for Hawaiʻi’s people and future.

18 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

 
 
 
 
 
DIFFERENCE-MAKERS

POLITICAL PRESSURE

2022 is a major election year in which every state legislator is up for reelection due to redistricting. With Hawaiʻi’s 
soaring cost of living top of mind with a pandemic-weary populous, politicians in every legislative district 
wanted to be able to say they delivered economic relief to the growing number of struggling voters. 

Ultimately, legislators are motivated most by their desire to remain in office. Reelection depends on winning 
a majority of the votes cast in a given election, but the method of securing those votes—the funders, the key 
community connections, the galvanizing issues—depends on a myriad of individual factors that can differ in 
varying degrees across separate races. 

Within this matrix of factors lie opportunities for influence. Professional lobbyists know how to tie the issue 
they’ve been hired to promote to the reelection prospects of different legislators—often through skillful use 
of the fundraising component of reelection campaigns. They make it easier for lawmakers to get reelected by 
steering funds toward candidates who support their issue(s). 

Like it or not, fundraising is a proven metric for determining the winner in an election. In Hawaiʻi state house 
Democratic primary races, where the difference in spending between two candidates is larger than $6,000, for 
example, the candidate with more campaign funds wins in an overwhelming 90 percent of cases.34

However, money isn’t everything. Political pressure can be generated through the hard work of community 
organizing as well. The monetary incentive to go along with the agenda of paid lobbyists can be 
overridden—if the community makes it clear that its differing position on the issue at hand represents a 
significant bloc of voters.

The role of organizers is to facilitate the galvanization of the community around its position, focus that position 
into a clear message, and bring the weight of the community to bear on the legislator in question. If a lawmaker 
can tell that the community they represent is overwhelmingly against an issue, no amount of promised 
fundraising assistance from a lobbyist on the opposite side of the issue will be worth the risk of alienating a 
majority of voters.

Creating and focusing pressure from the community onto the key lawmakers involved in an issue at the 
legislature is often critical to successful the passage of policies—especially ones that are big picture enough 
to represent transformational change. Lawmakers are cautious by nature and often unwilling to risk losing 
reelection by taking a chance on a radical idea, even if they agree in principle. Helping them to see that the 
community is, in fact, behind these big ideas, gives these lawmakers the confidence and political cover to go big 
and go bold.

After years of struggling to get a minimum wage bill passed, primarily due to the successful lobbying work of 
trade groups like the Chamber of Commerce of Hawaiʻi and the Hawaiʻi Restaurant Association, the political 
pressure generated through community organizing, successfully changed the reelection calculus of enough 
legislators to finally secure a long-overdue minimum wage increase—and a bigger increase than many 
thought possible.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 19

DIFFERENCE-MAKERS

COALITION COLLABORATION

It often takes years to get any policy through the 
legislature, and one thing that can help sustain that 
effort is the creation of coalitions to help organize 
and focus the community energy around an issue 
into a cohesive campaign that is efficient and 
transferring that energy into legislative success. 

The efforts of various coalitions—bringing 
together advocacy nonprofits, labor unions, 
service providers, small businesses, community 
organizations and everyday people—banded 
together and pooled resources toward strategic and 
successful legislative campaigns. In particular, the 
Hawaiʻi Tax Fairness Coalition and Raise Up Hawaiʻi 
demonstrated what is possible when a well-organized group of dedicated advocates commits to a collaborative 
legislative campaign.

Appleseed and its partners worked hard to refine our messaging, both in explaining the benefits of the EITC, 
minimum wage and various housing proposals, as well as in connecting those policies to the larger narrative 
of a Hawaiʻi growing increasingly out of reach for the average local family—and the responsibility of lawmakers 
to answer that dire problem with transformative policy. We then leveraged that messaging to drive community 
organizing efforts, recruit community spokespeople that could center the experience of local working families 
during key moments during the legislative process, including hearings, rallies and press conferences.

After years working together, the partners in these coalitions shared enough trust with one another to be able to 
work quickly, efficiently and dynamically to get our refined messaging out through an aggressive public relations 
campaign that involved earned media pieces, op-eds, and a robust social media presence. The use of non-
traditional allies in authoring op-eds—pulling in the voices of small business owners as well as major CEOs of 
some of Hawaiʻi’s most prominent firms—helped reach persuadable folks in the middle, broadening our support 
and building momentum.

Good relationships with key legislators and their staffers provided our coalitions with valuable information 
about the inner workings of the two chambers and their internal politics. This allowed the coalitions to time 
actions, media pushes and other tactics to coincide with internal movement within the legislature, maximizing 
the visibility of the campaigns and capitalizing on key moments.

CENTERING COMMUNITY VOICES

Appleseed is making a conscious effort to shift its theory of change toward one that places a greater emphasis 
on putting people first. The only way to achieve policies that work for everyone is through policies created for 

20 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

DIFFERENCE-MAKERS

and with the people most adversely impacted by our current system. Most legislators need to hear from these 
people directly, or no amount of abstract data points will move them to take bold action. This is especially true 
when they are feeling political pressure from lobbying groups opposed to these changes.

To change that dynamic and center the voices of impacted community members, it is important to engage them 
through events, meetings and even by dropping by their places of work to talk about their concerns over the 
cost of living and to build grassroots support for policies designed to alleviate the financial burden they feel. 
Through efforts like these, advocates this session were able to mobilize community members to participate in 
hearings, rallies, press conferences and even a march through Kalihi. 

These community-driven actions focused the attention of lawmakers on what everyday working folks think. This 
people-first approach made the difference in pushing legislators to finally pass a robust minimum wage bill, 
EITC expansion, and housing bills that were improved because of the perspectives provided by people with lived 
experience of houselessness and housing insecurity.

Hybrid Testimony

During the 2021 legislative session, the Hawaiʻi State Capitol was closed to the public entirely due to 
COVID-19 precautions. This completely changed the way many seasoned advocates—accustomed to 
dropping by the offices of lawmakers to talk story—interacted with decision makers. It also changed 
the way organizers mobilized members of the public to weigh-in through the legislative process of 
testifying on bills during hearings, as the system went entirely to remote, zoom-based testifying.

People get comfortable doing something a certain way, and it’s possible that the significant 
changes to the system of testimony itself was enough to deter verbal testimony—or it could have 
simply been the heavy toll the pandemic and its lock-downs took on the physical and mental 
health of many. But whatever the reason, the zoom-only system appeared to noticeably decrease 
the number of people choosing to speak on issues (they may still have submitted written-only 
testimony, however) in 2021. 

Remote testimony is something advocates have been pushing for years to get—particularly for folks 
that live in counties outside of Honolulu who otherwise have to buy plane tickets and miss work to 
fly over to Oʻahu to fully participate in the process. Fortunately, in 2022, the legislature was not only 
re-opened for in-person testimony (though at reduced capacity), the remote, zoom testimony option 
was retained as well, creating the hybrid system many had hoped for years to see.

In the future, the hybrid system should make it possible to mobilize a greater number of testifiers 
overall, thanks to remote access, while also allowing experienced advocates to make critical 
connections with legislators through office visits and in-person testimony.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 21

RECOMMENDATIONS

So what can advocates, concerned citizens 
and forward-thinking legislators do to try and 
build on and replicate the success of the 2022 
legislative session?

1.  Put people first from the beginning stages of the 
campaign all the way through to the end and 
allocate serious resources behind the cultivation 
of people power. Our community cannot craft 
solutions that work for everyone if those most 
adversely impacted by the current system are 
excluded from decision-making process. When 
people who are impacted by Hawaiʻi’s policies 
are on your side and you center their voices, 
lawmakers will listen much more carefully than 
they will to dry statistics and data alone. 

2.  Build capacity for long-haul campaigns and know that you will likely be fighting for several years until 

enough pieces fall into place for a successful push across the finish line. Cultivate relationships with as many 
organizations and advocates as you can, and do not overlook unlikely or unexpected collaborations that can 
expand the breadth of your supporters. 

3.  Pay attention to the whole political chessboard, including electoral politics. Even for nonprofits that avoid 
involvement in electoral politics, being aware of the political landscape and the pressures that elections 
are putting on key lawmakers is essential to understanding the motivations behind decisions during the 
legislative session. Having a good working understanding of these motivations is, in turn, critical to planning 
effective campaign strategy and knowing when and how to most effectively push for change.  

4.  Make the connection between everyday problems—from cost of living issues to health policy and everything 

in between—and a lack of government funding via tax revenue crystal clear at every opportunity. A fair 
tax system is essential to addressing Hawaiʻi’s continuing crises in affordable housing, healthcare, income 
inequality, food insecurity, climate change and more. By delivering financial relief to struggling working 
families while asking the wealthy and corporations to contribute sufficiently, we can ensure that the 
opportunities from which they benefited are expanded and maintained for future generations. This can also 
be a way to rectify ongoing injustices caused by colonialism and to increase racial and social equity, creating 
a more balanced, just and healthy society.

22 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

ENDNOTES

Cole, William, “Hawaii to receive over $6.1B in 

1. 
federal funds,” Honolulu Star-Advertiser, March 9, 2021,  
https://www.staradvertiser.com/2021/03/09/hawaii-
news/hawaii-to-receive-over-6-1b-in-federal-funds/

8. 
Colby, Seth and Dongliang Wu, “Earned 
Income Tax Credit Report: Tax Year 2020,” Hawaiʻi State 
Department of Taxation, November 2021, https://
files.hawaii.gov/tax/stats/stats/act107_2017/act107_
earnedincome_txcredit_2020.pdf

Ma, Sandy, “Our democracy starts with 
2. 
redistricting,” Honolulu Civil Beat, September 13, 2021,  
https://www.civilbeat.org/2021/09/our-democracy-
starts-with-redistricting/

9. 
Thomas, Devin, “Refunding Hawaiʻi,” Hawaiʻi 
Budget & Policy Center, January, 2022, https://www.
hibudget.org/publications/refunding-hawaii

“The Pandemic Divide: An ALICE Analysis of 

3. 
National COVID Surveys,” United For ALICE, October, 
2021, https://www.UnitedForALICE.org/National-
Reports

4. 
Giesting, Beth, “Wage trends and Hawaiʻi’s high 
cost of living,” Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center, October 
23, 2019, https://www.hibudget.org/blog/hawaii-
wages-cost-of-living

5. 
Woo, Nicole, “What is a living wage in Hawaiʻi in 
2022?,” Raise Up Hawaiʻi, January 2022, https://static1.
squarespace.com/static/5bff16be3c3a53b2d26b09ce/
t/61f0bfe41406aa1315519e4d/1643167717095/
What+is+a+Living+Wage+in+Hawaii_2022.pdf

Hoshijo, Leonard, “Minimum wage to increase 
6. 
to $10.10 in 2018,” Hawaiʻi State Department of Labor 
and Industrial Relations, December 29, 2017, https://
labor.hawaii.gov/blog/news/minimum-wage-to-
increase-to-10-10-in-2018/

Woo, Nicole. “The Earned Income Tax Credit 

7. 
(EITC),” Hawaiʻi Tax Fairness Coalition, December 2018, 
https://www.hitaxfairness.org/earned-income-tax-
credit

Woo, Nicole, “Revenue Raisers,” Hawaiʻi Tax 

10. 
Fairness Coalition, January 2021, https://static1.
squarespace.com/static/5e2c845b147142225aea686b/
t/601defd2d78d3824f6c9692e/1612574675622/
Tax+Fairness+Saves+The+Economy.pdf

Tian, Eugene, “Self-Sufficiency Income 
11. 
Standard Estimates for Hawaiʻi, 2016,” Hawaiʻi State 
Department of Business, Economic Development 
and Tourism, December 2017, https://files.hawaii.
gov/dbedt/economic/reports/self-sufficiency/self-
sufficiency_2016.pdf

Blair, Chad, “Minimum wage increase dead 
12. 
for 2019 session,” Honolulu Civil Beat, April 26, 2019, 
https://www.civilbeat.org/2019/04/minimum-wage-
increase-dead-for-2019-session/

Dayton, Kevin, “Lawmakers and Ige back bills 

13. 
for housing and tax relief and for working families,” 
Jan. 15, 2020, Honolulu Star-Advertiser, https://
www.staradvertiser.com/2020/01/15/hawaii-news/
lawmakers-and-ige-back-bills-for-housing-and-tax-
relief-and-for-working-families/

14. 

Analysis of Hawaiʻi State Department of 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 23

ENDNOTES

Business, Economic Development and Tourism 
(DBEDT) data by Nate Hix, Living Wage Hawaiʻi; CPU-U 
used to calculate living wage; 2 percent annual 
inflation assumed.

16, 2022, https://www.kitv.com/news/business/
plan-to-house-the-homeless-living-outside-waianae-
boat-harbor/article_79191674-4dd3-11ed-9a9c-
93a013e08e12.html

15. 
“The most expensive states to live in,” 
World Population Review, April 2022,  https://
worldpopulationreview.com/state-rankings/most-
expensive-states-to-live-in

Giesting, Beth, “Recession in Review: Looking 

22. 
back at the Great Recession, 2007–09,” Hawaiʻi Budget 
& Policy Center, June 2019, https://www.hibudget.org/
publications/recession-review

“Hawaiʻi’s Affordable Housing Crisis: The High 

16. 
Cost of Our Affordable Housing Shortfall,” Hawaiʻi 
Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice, July 
2014, https://hiappleseed.org/publications/hawaii-
affordable-housing-crisis

23. 
Giesting, Beth, “Tourism dependence 
responsible for Hawaiʻi’s dramatic unemployment 
rate,” May 6, 2022, Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center, 
May 6, 2020, https://www.hibudget.org/blog/tourism-
dependence-hawaii-dramatic-unemployment-rate

Giesting, Beth, “Good Health Depends On 

17. 
Decent Housing, Part Three: Building a Housing
Market for Hawaiʻi’s Working Families,” Hawaiʻi 
Budget & Policy Center, January 2022, https://static1.
squarespace.com/static/5ef66d594879125d04f91774/
t/61dc75ae48fd7920fbf8956e/1641838002860/
Health+and+Housing+3_FINAL.pdf

Perez, Rob and Agnel Philip, “To Reclaim 

18. 
Ancestral Land, All Native Hawaiians Need Is a 
$300,000 Mortgage and to Wait in Line for Decades,” 
ProPublica, October 24, 2020, https://www.propublica.
org/article/hawaii-native-land-homesteads-
department-of-hawaiian-home-lands

Lovell, Blaze, “State Reaches Historic $328 

19. 
Million Settlement In Lawsuit Over Native Hawaiian 
Homesteads,” Honolulu Civil Beat, April 26, 2022, 
https://www.civilbeat.org/2022/04/state-reaches-
historic-328-million-settlement-in-lawsuit-over-native-
hawaiian-homesteads/

20. 

Ibid

21. 
Kabir, Shanila, “Plan to house the homeless 
living outside Waiʻanae Boat Harbor,” KITV4, October 

Giesting, Beth, “Healing Hawaiʻi’s Economy,” 

24. 
Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center, January 2021, https://
www.hibudget.org/publications/healing-hawaii-
economy

Cole, William, “Hawaii to receive over $6.1B in 

25. 
federal funds,” Honolulu Star-Advertiser, March 9, 2021,  
https://www.staradvertiser.com/2021/03/09/hawaii-
news/hawaii-to-receive-over-6-1b-in-federal-funds/

26. 
Giesting, Beth, “Keeping families afloat will 
keep our economy alive,” Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy 
Center, April 6, 2020, https://www.hibudget.org/blog/
keeping-families-afloat-will-keep-our-economy-alive

Ubay, Jason, “Council on Revenues forecasts 

27. 
jump in Hawaiʻi tax revenue,” Hawaiʻi Public Radio, 
January 7, 2022, https://www.hawaiipublicradio.org/
local-news/2022-01-07/council-on-revenues-forecasts-
jump-in-hawai%CA%BBi-tax-revenue

HPR News Staff, “Forecast expects Hawaiʻi to 

28. 
draw in more tax revenue this year,” Hawaiʻi Public 
Radio, March 11, 2022, https://www.hawaiipublicradio.
org/local-news/2022-03-11/economists-expect-hawaii-
to-draw-in-more-tax-revenue-this-year

24 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

ENDNOTES

29. 
Giesting, Beth, “Hawaiʻi’s job losses are 
increasing economic inequity,” Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy 
Center, July 1, 2020, https://www.hibudget.org/blog/
hawaii-job-losses-increase-economic-inequity

2022,” New Silver Lending, September 6, 2022, https://
newsilver.com/the-lender/hawaii-housing-market-
forecast/

30. 

Thomas (2022), p 9

31. 

Woo (2021)

32. 

The Lender, “Hawaii Housing Market Forecast 

33. 

Woo (2021)

Analysis of Hawaiʻi State Campaign Spending 

34. 
Commission data from 2008 to 2020 conducted by 
Nate Hix, Living Wage Hawaii

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 25

26 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE