Title: Keeping Hawaiʻi Housed
Date: unknown
URL: https://hiappleseed.org/publications/keeping-hawaii-housed
PDF: https://hiappleseed.org/s/Keeping-Hawaii-Housed_FINAL.pdf
============================================================

Reducing the high 
costs of eviction 
through a combination 
of rent relief, eviction 
mediation and tenant 
protections.

KEEPING
HAWAI‘I
HOUSED

March 2023

Authors: Will White, Devin Thomas 
With contributions by Abbey Seitz, Planning for Community, LLC

This report was supported with funding from AlohaCare

The Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center (HBPC) is a program of the 
Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice. HBPC’s 
mission is to ensure that our state and local economic policies 
increase opportunity for all residents. We do this by analyzing 
and understanding the implications of tax and budget 
decisions and making sure that the public and policy-makers 
are informed through strategic communications, coalitions, 
and key partners. Our work is guided by the belief that 
government at all levels should play an active role in helping 
people reach their full potential.

Founded in 1994 by Hawaiʻi’s community 
health centers, AlohaCare is a community-
rooted, nonprofit health plan serving 
over 80,000 Medicaid and dually eligible 
Medicare members on all islands. Our 
mission is to serve individuals and 
communities in the true spirit of aloha by 
providing and advocating for access to 
quality health care for all.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary 

The Cost of Eviction 

• 
Individual & Household Costs
•  The Eviction Toll: A Case Study
•  Community-Wide Costs
•  Other Costs
•  Preventing Eviction Can Result in 

Significant Savings

Hawai‘i’s COVID-19 Eviction Protections

•  Eviction Moratorium
•  Rental Assistance Program
•  Landlord-Tenant Mediation Program  

(Act 57)

3

4

4
6
8
9
10

11

11
11
12

Rental Relief Best Practices

•  Eligibility Criteria and Timeline
•  Streamlining Applications
•  Rental Assistance Uses
•  Marketing, Outreach and Tenant Support

Stronger Renter Protections Through Just 
Cause Eviction 

14

15
15
17
17

18

•  Loopholes in Hawai‘i’s Landlord-Tenant 

18

Code
Just Cause Eviction
• 
JCE State-By-State Comparison
• 
•  Modeling a Just Cause Eviction Law

Recommendations to Limit Harm Caused by 
Evictions

Endnotes

19
20
21

22

23

Copyright © 2023 Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center. All rights reserved. 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1180, Honolulu, HI 96813

2 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Safe, stable, affordable housing is a cornerstone of 
good health, economic prosperity and educational 
attainment. But a combination of limited housing 
supply and high demand has made finding a stable 
place to call home in Hawaiʻi an increasing challenge 
for many working families. Far too many Hawaiʻi 
renters are at risk of losing their housing through 
eviction because of the significant costs associated 
with housing. This widespread instability is fueling 
the state’s homelessness crisis and increasing rates of 
outmigration to the continent.

Currently median rents in Hawaiʻi are hovering around 
$2,500 per month, a 12.6 percent increase since 2019.1 
For urban Honolulu, rents have increased by 11.1 
percent over the same period, while the metro area 
Kahului, Maui, has increased by 15.1 percent.2 In 2021, 
58 percent of the state’s occupied rental units were 
spending over 30 percent of their household income on 
rent.3 This burden makes it more difficult for working 
families to afford the high costs of food, transportation, 
healthcare and education. 

As detailed in our three-part 2022 report “Good Health 
Depends on Decent Housing,” lack of stable housing is 
often associated with poor health outcomes, including 
higher levels of chronic stress, increased incidence of 
chronic conditions like obesity and heart disease, and 
higher incidences of Adverse Childhood Experiences for 
families with children. These outcomes have significant 
financial and social costs that are borne by us all.

This is a major problem for Hawaiʻi, and it was only 
made worse by the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to 
widespread unemployment, particularly for service-
industry workers connected to Hawaiʻi’s dominant 
tourism industry. These workers are often some of the 
lowest paid and least covered by paid sick days and 
other policies that keep workers healthy.

To prevent a wave of evictions that could have 
occurred as a result of financial hardship from the 
pandemic, federal, state and local authorities across 

the country enacted eviction moratoriums that kept 
millions of renters housed during the heights of the 
pandemic, and billions of dollars have been invested 
in Emergency Rental Assistance through congressional 
appropriation.4 But nearly all those protections have 
either expired, or have had their funds significantly 
spent down. The City & County of Honolulu closed 
applications for rental assistance on June 30, 2022.5 

As the COVID-19 renter protections and assistance 
programs evaporate, renters in Hawaiʻi are once again 
facing increased challenges in maintaining stable 
housing. For working families with low incomes, this 
pressure is particularly acute, as a higher percentage of 
monthly income is required for these families to remain 
stably housed. This instability increases the likelihood 
of experiencing a sudden loss of housing, or exposure 
to the many negative health outcomes associated with 
a lack of good housing. 

This report explores the major public and social costs 
of evictions on low-income families, key interventions 
made to reduce the incidence of eviction during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, and potential policy interventions 
at the state level that can reduce the incidence of 
eviction for Hawaiʻi renters going forward. 

Building on the success of Hawaiʻi’s COVID-19 eviction 
protections, the Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center (HBPC) 
recommends the state:

•  Create a permanent rent relief program coupled 
with mediation services that can resolve rent 
disputes before they enter the courts. 

•  Replicate the pre-trial eviction mediation 

requirements implemented by Hawaiʻi’s Act 57 
pilot program.  

• 

Implement stronger renter protections in the 
form of a just cause eviction law that will provide 
additional security for renters in Hawaiʻi’s high-cost 
rental market.

KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED • 3

 
THE COST OF EVICTION

INDIVIDUAL & HOUSEHOLD COSTS

Evictions take a devastating toll on the health and 
wellbeing of families that experience them. A growing 
body of research by Mathew Desmond, a leading 
scholar on evictions in the United States, shows that 
evictions tend to fall more heavily on women with 
children—in particular women of color.6 

Among tenants who appear in eviction court, mothers 
with children are the most likely to receive an eviction 
judgment.7 One driver behind this disparity is likely the 
presence of children in a housing unit. Landlords often 

have a perception that children will cause damage to a 
unit or lead to frequent noise complaints. 
This disparity could also be a function of the high cost 
of raising a family, especially in markets where rents are 
rapidly rising. Families with children often have higher 
monthly expenses for food, childcare, and healthcare, 
which put additional strain on household finances and 
increase the likelihood of housing insecurity.

Researchers have also shown that mothers 
experiencing eviction or housing loss are more likely to 

4 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

 
The Cost of Eviction

report being in poor health, experiencing depression, 
and enduring financial hardship.8 These effects can 
often persist for years after an eviction occurs. Two 
years after experiencing an eviction, some mothers 
have been found to demonstrate higher rates of 
depression and financial hardship, relative to their 
peers who have not experienced an eviction.9 The 
experience of losing stable housing through eviction 
can compound stress and may limit a person’s ability to 
fully recover financially and emotionally. 

Our report, “Good Health Depends on Decent Housing,” 
demonstrates that housing instability adversely affects 
child health and family well-being. Being behind on 
rent in the last 12 months is associated with higher 
incidences of poorer health among caregivers of young 
children, as well as poorer health among children.10

Chronic stress associated with being housing insecure 
can lead to children experiencing higher rates of 
Adverse Childhood Experiences or ACEs. Research has 
shown that children who experience ACEs can be at 
higher risk for cancer, obesity, diabetes or anxiety and 
depression. Additionally, children who experience 
one or more ACEs are more likely to experience 

homelessness in adulthood, as well as lower levels of 
financial well-being throughout their lifetime.11

When families suddenly lose access to stable housing, 
children often experience significant disruption in daily 
life, including school performance. Some children from 
families facing eviction may need to switch schools 
altogether as their families secure new housing, 
sometimes in completely different communities. 

Research demonstrates that switching schools can 
lead to up to a half-year loss of educational attainment 
for some students, while moving three or more times 
during childhood can lower future work earnings by as 
much as 52 percent.12

Given the strong association between housing 
insecurity and poor family well-being, Hawaiʻi’s high 
cost of housing poses a significant threat to low-income 
families with children. Not only does the stress of 
housing insecurity negatively impact health, it poses 
significant threats to a child’s educational outcomes 
and potential future earnings. Viewed through this 
lens, it becomes imperative that lawmakers prioritize 
keeping families stably housed.

KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED • 5

The Cost of Eviction

THE EVICTION TOLL: A CASE STUDY

The stress of going through an eviction proceeding 
or being forced to secure new housing with little 
advance notice can negatively impact the mental 
health and well-being of tenants. For tenants living 
on restricted incomes, the impact of this stress can 
be especially devastating.

For Celeste M. Gonsalves, a renter from Kailua, the 
stress of undergoing eviction induced panic attacks 
and many sleepless nights. Having been involved in 
a serious car accident in 2006, her injuries began to 
flare up when she took a job as a nanny in 2017. Her 
doctor declared her permanently disabled in 2018 
and recommended she move to a ground floor 
apartment to reduce the stress on her body.  

Celeste was excited when she found a legally-
permitted accessory dwelling unit (ADU) in Kailua 
that not only allowed her ground floor access, 
but also accepted her Section 8 Housing Choice 
Voucher. Celeste wanted to find a long-term rental 
where she could start her home-based business 
and eventually transition off the Section 8 program, 
so this situation seemed ideal. 

Celeste signed a one-year lease with a verbal 
agreement that she would stay for at least 3 to 4 
years. Soon after she moved in, however, a series of 
disagreements between Celeste and her landlords 
made it clear that this was not the ideal living 
arrangement she had hoped for. 

Celeste became concerned that her neighbor’s 
landscaper was smoking cigarettes while operating 
gas powered yard equipment four feet from her 
unit, which she deemed a significant danger to her 
health and safety. Despite reaching an agreement 

with her neighbor and landlord about the health 
and safety issue, the behavior persisted. Since her 
landlords refused to take action, Celeste filed an 
official complaint with her Section 8 caseworker, 
who also deemed the situation a legitimate health 
and safety risk. Celeste then stopped paying her 
portion of the rent until her landlord took action to 
resolve the issue.  

Her landlord began a series of retaliatory actions 
aimed at either compelling her to pay her portion of 
the rent, or removing her from the unit entirely, all 
while failing to resolve her original complaint.

“They tried to get me booted from the Section 8 
program,” Celeste says. “They went to my Section 8 
caseworker and lodged an official complaint against 
me and demanded that I be immediately evicted.” 

Fortunately for Celeste, this occurred during the 
COVID-19 eviction moratorium, and due to Section 
8 regulations, Celeste could not be immediately 
evicted. But this only escalated her landlord’s 
retaliatory behavior. 

Celeste’s landlords began subjecting her to verbal 
abuse and harassment, which created a hostile 
living environment. Celeste eventually filed for a 
Temporary Restraining Order against one of her 
landlords, and the issue eventually went to court 
where it was resolved. But that same day, when 
Celeste came home from court, her landlord had 
blocked access to her assigned parking stall and 
cut off her access to the garbage cans and other 
common areas.

In an effort to circumvent the eviction moratorium, 

6 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

The Cost of Eviction

which prevented eviction for non-payment of rent, 
Celeste’s landlord filed an eviction suit, claiming 
that Celeste was not disposing of her garbage 
properly and had caused electrical and plumbing 
damage and refused to allow inspection. 

Due to the eviction moratorium, the case was 
continued, forcing Celeste to appear over 10 
times in eviction court, where she represented 
herself without the assistance of an attorney. As 
the court proceedings went on, Celeste says she 
was constantly worried about having to find a new 
residence that would accept her Section 8 voucher 
and that met her physical needs. 

“As a disabled person, who wasn’t an attorney, I 
was disadvantaged at every step of the process,” 
Celeste said. “It seemed like the whole system failed 
me at every turn.”

The stress of living next door to hostile landlords 
while preparing for various court appearances all 
took its toll on Celeste’s mental and physical health. 
During this time, Celeste regularly experienced 
panic attacks, as well as sleepless nights wondering 
how she would be able to resolve her court case, 
and whether or not she would need to find a new, 
suitable rental. 

“How was I going to find another place that accepts 
Section 8?” she said. “It was hard enough finding 
this place. I don’t know how I’m going to find 
another that I can afford.”

Celeste’s anxiety was compounded by the stress 
of having to appear in court on multiple occasions 
without legal representation. Celeste couldn’t afford 
a lawyer, but her landlord had hired an experienced 
eviction attorney. At times, Celeste said she felt 
bewildered in court, and found it difficult to counter 
the arguments leveled against her. 

Despite these challenges, Celeste quickly became 
an expert in Hawaiʻi’s landlord-tenant code and 
continued to fight her eviction in court. She 
eventually received an eviction judgment, but 
continues to appeal the ruling, claiming her 
landlord acted in bad faith by engaging in illegal 
tenant retaliation, which is explicitly prohibited by 
Hawaiʻi’s landlord-tenant code. 

Fortunately, Celeste was able to secure new 
housing that accepted her voucher and met 
her physical needs. But her ordeal has taken a 
significant toll on her well-being. 

KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED • 7

The Cost of Eviction

COMMUNITY-WIDE COSTS

While evictions take an enormous toll on the people 
that suffer through them, state and local governments 
also incur significant costs when evictions take place. 
In the most extreme cases, evictions can lead to 
homelessness, which in turn greatly increase costs 
for state and local governments as the need for social 
safety net services and interventions increase. 

Evaluating the various costs associated with eviction 
in Hawaiʻi can provide policymakers with a clearer 
picture of how evictions not only negatively impact the 
households that experience them, but our community 
at-large as well.

Using the University of Arizona’s James E. Rogers 
College of Law’s “Cost of Eviction Calculator,” HBPC 
conducted an analysis of the various costs to the 
State of Hawaiʻi that are associated with eviction 
and the increased need for homeless services. This 
analysis estimates costs for various downstream effects 
associated with homelessness. Using a baseline of 
2,500 evictions annually, and assuming that up to 25 

• 

• 
• 

8 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

percent of those evictions result in application for 
homeless services, the total cost of eviction to the state 
of Hawaiʻi is $30,705,671 per year.

The major public costs of eviction for the state of 
Hawaiʻi are:13
• 
• 

Emergency shelter: $13.7 million
Inpatient medical care: $10 million. This is likely 
due to our state’s relatively high cost of inpatient 
care, which is $2,945 per night, putting Hawaiʻi in 
the top-20 most expensive states for inpatient care 
in the nation.14
Emergency room care: $3.5 million. At an average 
cost of $2,076 per visit, Hawaiʻi has the ninth-most 
expensive emergency room care in the nation.15 
Since most homeless individuals lack health 
insurance coverage, many of them do not seek out 
medical care until their condition has significantly 
worsened.16 As a result, they often report to hospitals 
with illnesses that can be extremely costly to treat.
Foster care: $2.15 million
Juvenile delinquency: $1.25 million

The Cost of Eviction

Juvenile Delinquency

$1,253,747

Figure 1. Community cost of eviction by category, Hawai‘i (2023)

Foster Care

$2,152,795

4.1%

7%

Emergency Room Care

$3,562,416

11.6%

44.7%

32.6%

Emergency Shelter

$13,713,700

Inpatient Medical Care

$10,023,013

OTHER COSTS

Beyond increased spending on safety net services, 
the state and counties incur additional costs when 
police enforce laws that criminalize homelessness. 
These enforcement measures—primarily sweeps of 
homeless encampments—are not only costly, but 
highly disruptive to unhoused individuals, many of 
whom may already be in a state of crisis due to their 
loss of housing. The City & County of Honolulu spends 
approximately $5 million annually to engage in formal 
sweeps of homeless encampments.17

While Honolulu spends about $10 million per year on 
homeless services, this represents less than 1 percent of 

the county’s $3 billion operating budget.18 The annual 
allocation for homeless services is also 1/30th of what 
the county is spending on its entire policing budget.

When police enforcement of homelessness results in 
incarceration, costs increase even further. According 
to a recent study, it costs $198 per day, or $72,000 
annually, to incarcerate an individual at the Oʻahu 
Community Correctional Center.19 By contrast, it would 
cost between $20,000–30,000 per person to participate 
in the city’s Housing First initiative, which quickly 
provides housing with supportive services to people 
experiencing homelessness.20

KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED • 9

The Cost of Eviction

PREVENTING EVICTION CAN RESULT IN SIGNIFICANT SAVINGS

The high costs associated with eviction are not only a 
burden on Hawaiʻi’s state and local governments, the 
strategies currently being used often do little to address 
the root causes of eviction or to reduce the rate of 
homelessness. Investing in programs that keep people 
housed would create significant savings, while also 
ensuring low-income renters stay housed and avoid 
sliding into homelessness.

Approximately 2,500 individuals experienced eviction 
in Hawaiʻi in 2018.21 If the state were to invest in a 
permanent rent relief program that provided each of 
these households with $3,000 per year in support, the 

program would cost the state $7,500,000, annually. This 
would result in over $23 million in savings each year.

While it is unclear that a permanent rent relief program 
would be able to reach all 2,500 individuals at risk of 
eviction, if the state were to reach even half of them, 
a $3.7 million investment in rent assistance could 
keep over 1,200 people stably housed and still deliver 
significant savings to the state. Additionally, by reducing 
costs from police sweeps and incarceration of the 
unsheltered, the state and counties would see additional 
savings that could be reinvested in eviction prevention or 
services for those experiencing homelessness.

10 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

HAWAI‘I’S COVID-19 EVICTION 
PROTECTIONS

Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic in 
early 2020, Hawaiʻi established a number of policies 
and programs to prevent evictions and help renters 
stay housed. These policies were partly about 
minimizing the economic disruption caused by the 
pandemic, but also were designed to slow the spread 
of the COVID-19 virus. Evictions contribute to the 
spread of highly contagious diseases like COVID-19 by 
preventing infected households from being able to 
quarantine themselves.

Key policy interventions and programs included: 
1.  Emergency eviction moratorium
2.  Rental assistance program
3.  Landlord-tenant mediation program 

This discussion provides an overview of these 
interventions and best practices to consider for 
structuring programs in the future. National best 
practices summarized in this report are based on 
literature developed by the National Low Income 
Housing Coalition (NLIHC).

EVICTION MORATORIUM

In 2020, the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention issued a temporary national moratorium 
on most evictions for the nonpayment of rent. 
Generally, the moratorium was in force in 
jurisdictions that were experiencing high-levels of 
COVID-19 infections (including, at times, counties 
in Hawaiʻi). The U.S. Supreme Court ruled to end 
the federal eviction moratorium on August 26, 2021. 
Supplementally, then-Governor David Ige issued an 
emergency order on April 17, 2020, that suspended all 
evictions in Hawaiʻi for the nonpayment of rent. The 
state moratorium was extended several times before 
ending on August 6, 2021. 

RENTAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

Both the federal and state eviction moratoriums 
were critical to keeping  families housed during the 
pandemic. In 2021 alone, the moratoriums (in addition 
to other government interventions) prevented an 
estimated 1.36 million formal evictions nationwide 
(approximately 5,700 evictions in Hawaiʻi).22 

While moratoriums are among the most powerful tools 
to prevent evictions, they should ideally be used as last 
resorts. In a housing ecosystem with sufficient safety 
net supports already in place, emergency moratoriums 
would be perhaps unneeded. 

In December 2020, Congress provided $25 billion 
in Emergency Rental Assistance for struggling 
renters (known as “ERA1”). In March 2021, Congress 
appropriated an additional $21.6 billion for ERA (known 
as “ERA2”), which allowed tenants to receive assistance 
for up to 18 months.

ERA was distributed by the U.S. Treasury Department 
to State and Local governments, who administered 
the funds to eligible renters. To qualify for rent 
assistance, households generally had to meet one of 
the following criteria: 
1.  Have incomes below 80 percent of the area median 

KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED • 11

COVID-19 Protections

2. 

3. 

income (AMI); 
Include individuals who qualified for government 
unemployment benefits or could demonstrate 
financial hardship due to the COVID-19 pandemic; or 
Include individuals who could demonstrate a risk of 
experiencing homelessness or housing instability. 

Building on the criteria established by the federal 
government, Hawaiʻi developed its own additional 
priorities for distribution of rent assistance. 
Jurisdictions in Hawaiʻi prioritized distributing ERA 
to households with incomes below 50 percent of the 
area median income (AMI), so that assistance would be 
targeted to the state’s lowest-income renters.

ERA Distribution by County

ERA in Hawaiʻi was administered through its four 
counties, who contracted organizations to provide tenant 
outreach, manage ERA applications, and distribute 

funds. The responsible county agencies and contracted 
organizations are listed below. The amount of distributed 
ERA funds, by county, is provided in Table 1. 

County Agencies Administering Contracts for Rent 
Assistance:
•  Kauaʻi County Housing Agency
•  Honolulu County Office of Economic Revitalization
•  Maui County Department of Housing and Human 

Concerns

•  Hawaiʻi County Office of Housing and Community 

Development

Contracted Organizations to Provide Rent Assistance:
•  Kauaʻi: Kauaʻi Federal Credit Union
•  Oʻahu: Catholic Charities, Council for Native 

Hawaiian Advancement
•  Maui: Catholic Charities
•  Hawaiʻi Island: Hawaiian Community Assets

Table 1. ERA Funds Distributed, by County

County

Kaua‘i

O‘ahu

Maui

Hawai‘i

State Total

Total Funds 
Disbursed

Total Applications 
Completed and 
Funds Disbursed

Total Denied 
Applications

Average Distribution 
Per Approved 
Applicant

$19 million

$190 million

$32 million

$24 million

$265 million

1,701

15,000

9,700

2,731

29,132

708

Not Available

684

2,131

Not Available

$11,377

$12,666

$7,724

$3,143

Not Available

Table 1. Figures based on data provided on County Rental Assistance online dashboards. Data is current as of January 25th, 2023.

LANDLORD-TENANT MEDIATION PROGRAM (ACT 57)

Following the end of the state’s eviction moratorium on 
August 6, 2021, Act 57 (2021) required that all landlords 
offer tenants the opportunity to mediate prior to 
eviction proceedings. 

The mediation program was facilitated by five different 
mediation centers across the state, with a center 
located on the island of Kauaʻi, Oʻahu, Maui, and two 
centers located on Hawaiʻi Island:

12 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

COVID-19 Protections

•  Kauaʻi Economic Opportunity Mediation Center
•  Mediation Center of the Pacific (Oʻahu)
•  Maui Mediation Service
•  Kuʻikahi Mediation Center (East Hawaiʻi) and the 

West Hawaiʻi Mediation Center

Through this program, landlords and tenants were 
provided with a free 1.5- to 2-hour mediation session 
facilitated by a trained and seasoned mediator. While 
there was tenant-landlord mediation available prior to 
COVID, this program differed in that: 
• 
•  Mediation occurred directly prior to the eviction 

It was facilitated by volunteer mediators; 

case being heard within court;

•  Mediation sessions lasted only 20–30 minutes; and 
• 

Landlords were not required to provide the 
opportunity to mediate disputes.

In comparison to the pre-COVID landlord-tenant 
mediation, the Act 57 requirements are considered part 
of the “enhanced” mediation program (EMP). 

In 2022, Hawaiʻi Appleseed and the Mediation Center 
of the Pacific published “Eviction Prevention Through 
Hawaiʻi’s Tenant-Landlord Mediation Program” which 
analyzed the impacts, as well as the successes and 
shortcomings of EMP, as compared to pre-COVID 
mediation programs.23 As part of this study, Hawaiʻi 
Appleseed and the Mediation Center of the Pacific 
conducted interviews with tenants, landlords, and 

attorneys who participated in EMP. Findings of this 
study indicate that EMP provides various benefits for 
tenants, such as: 

• 

Increased housing stability: Pre-COVID mediation 
programs only resulted in 23 percent of tenants 
remaining housed. In comparison, EMP resulted in 
nearly 85 percent of tenants remaining housed. This 
translated to 1,500 residents staying housed, who 
may have otherwise been evicted. 

•  Decreased need for litigation and legal 

representation: Since EMP occurs pre-litigation, 
this mediation has reduced the number of eviction 
proceedings within the courts. This decreases the 
judiciary’s case load and allows for better use of 
public resources. It is also beneficial for renters to 
keep housing disputes out of the courts, given the 
large disparity between landlords and tenants, with 
regard to legal representation.  

Based on this study, our findings show that less 
than 1 percent of tenants have legal representation 
in eviction court, while over 60 percent of landlords 
do. Generally speaking, neither landlords or tenants 
have legal representation in mediation sessions. 

Results of the Act 57 program, in regards to the number 
of cases mediated and the number of agreements 
reached, are further summarized below in Table 2. 

Table 2. Act 57 EMP Results (August 2021–August 2022 Data, City & County of Honolulu Only)

County

Kaua‘i

O‘ahu

3,047

1,379

Maui

702

118

Hawai‘i

State Total

285

150

4,078

1,660

44

13

13 (100%)

1,201 (87%)

82 (69%)

119 (79%)

1,415 (85%)

Total Number of 
Cases Opened

Total Number of 
Cases Mediated

Number of 
Agreements
Reached

Table 2. Figures based on data provided by the state’s five mediation centers who administered the Act 57 program.

KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED • 13

 
RENTAL RELIEF BEST 
PRACTICES

Given the success of Hawaiʻi’s Emergency Rental 
Assistance program in helping to keep vulnerable 
renters housed during the pandemic, Hawaiʻi now has 
an opportunity to build on this success by creating a 
permanent rental assistance program. 

Key findings from this report are summarized below. 
The summary below makes note of when differences 
arise between the input collected by local ERA 
distributors in Hawaiʻi and national best practices 
provided by the NLIHC. 

Looking at other rent relief models around the country, 
the National Low Income Housing Coalition(NLIHC) 
published a brief, “Emergency Rental Assistance: A 
Blueprint For A Permanent Program,” which provided 
general strategies and policy recommendations to 
achieve successful implementation of ERA programs. 

Additionally, in December 2022 Hawaiʻi Appleseed 
held an all-day convening of rent relief and mediation 
providers from across the state. The primary purpose 
of the convening was to gather input on best practices 
to include in a future permanent rental assistance and 
mediation program.

14 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

Best Practices

tracts with higher rates of unemployment or 
COVID-19 infections.  

NLIHC notes that prioritization of low-income 
renters or other marginalized populations 
requires intentional planning to not slow down 
implementation. NLIHC also urges programs to 
clarify and clearly state the target population on the 
program’s website and other program materials. 
This should also include data to justify why certain 
populations have been prioritized. 

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA AND TIMELINE

•  Prioritizing Low-Income or Marginalized 

Households: In an attempt to distribute funding as 
quickly as possible, most ERA programs across the 
country selected applications on a “first-come, first-
served” basis.  

However, NLIHC makes note that first come, 
first served systems may inadvertently prioritize 
applicants who face the least application barriers. 
For example, some ERA programs utilized publicly 
available data and resources to prioritize census 

STREAMLINING APPLICATIONS

•  Avoid Burdensome Paperwork: Documentation, 

•  Ensuring Adequate Staff Capacity and 

such as requiring proof of COVID-19-related 
hardship, a lease agreement, employer income 
verification, tax forms, or identification documents 
like a birth certificate or social security card, 
can impede a tenant’s ability to apply for rental 
assistance and also slows down distribution of 
rent relief funds. Wherever possible, the NLIHC 
recommends three approaches to reduce 
burdensome paperwork:  

Self Attestation allows an applicant to attest to 
their income, COVID-19-related hardship, housing 
instability, or amount of rental arrears they owe. 
A December 2021 study found that the adoption 
of different forms of self-attestation improved 
spending outcomes. 

Categorical Eligibility allows a household to be 
deemed eligible if it has been verified as low-
income by another local, state, or federal program, 
such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program and the Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families program. 

Fact-Specific Proxy allows programs to use other 
facts to infer a household’s income eligibility, such as 
the median income of the household’s census tract. 

Infrastructure: Funding is needed to ensure 
programs are efficiently staffed to process 
applications and distribute funds equitably and 
efficiently. 

•  Engage Housing Navigators: Programs should 
engage housing navigators to provide additional 
support to renters, particularly during the 
application process. Housing navigators can also 
help mediate issues between renters and landlords. 
This eases the process for tenants and can also 
reduce the workload of rent providers. 

• 

Improving Online Application Systems and 
Addressing Technological Barriers: Online ERA 
applications were used by ERA programs across the 
country to increase access to benefits. However, 
online-only applications can create challenges for 
many people, especially in rural communities that 
lack access to stable internet.  

Some of these issues can be addressed by making 
applications available in multiple formats, e.g., 
online, via mobile phone, by calling a phone 
number (like 211), and in-person. Some localities in 
the U.S. addressed these challenges by partnering 
with public libraries, schools, and other institutions 
with built-in access to computers and tablets. 

KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED • 15

 
 
 
 
 
 
Best Practices

• 

• 

Language and Translation Services: Non-English 
speaking communities make up a disproportionate 
amount of rental assistance recipients. For this 
reason, an estimated 81 percent of ERA programs in 
the U.S. conducted outreach in multiple languages. 
This includes making websites, applications, and 
other materials available in multiple languages, 
as well as having in-person translation support for 
filling out applications.  

Attendees at the Hawaiʻi Stakeholder Convening 
further emphasized the need for door-to-door 
outreach for immigrant communities who may 
lack cultural understanding of local housing and 
government assistance systems.  

Increasing Access by Reducing Stigma: To further 
enhance language access, the NLIHC encourages 
ERA programs to remove stigmatizing language from 
outreach materials and applications. De-stigmatizing 
language highlights that it is not the fault of the 
renter if they need extra financial support.  

A study conducted by the People Lab at the 
University of California, Berkeley found that 
when tenants received an ERA mailer with “de-
stigmatizing” language, they were 89 percent more 
likely to request an ERA application and 40 percent 
more likely to complete an ERA application.  

•  Access in Native and Rural Communities: Renters 
in rural and predominantly-native communities 
have faced unique challenges in learning about and 
accessing rental assistance, in part due to limited 
broadband access.  

In addition to the strategies outlined in the “Online 
Application Systems” section above, the NLIHC 
also encourages rent assistance programs to 
prioritize physical outreach materials and placing 
them in visible public locations ( barber shops, nail 
salons, churches, health centers, etc.) in addition 
to digital outreach.  

Attendees at the Hawaiʻi Stakeholder Convening 
further emphasized the need to partner with 
the Office of Hawaiian Affairs, the Department 
of Hawaiian Home Lands, and other agencies 
and organizations serving Native Hawaiian 
communities.  

•  Streamlining Applications by Making Bulk 
Payments to Large Landlords and Utilities: 
Several ERA programs in the U.S. identified 
bulk payments to large landlords and utility 
companies as an innovative approach to increase 
program accessibility and prevent multiple 
evictions at once. This approach can also reduce 
administrative burden. 

•  Access for People with Disabilities: More than 4 
million people with disabilities in the U.S. live in 
low income households that pay more 50 percent 
of their income on rent. The NLIHC encourages 
ERA programs to regularly re-examine the extent 
to which they provide equitable access to people 
with disabilities.  

•  Direct-to-Tenant Assistance: The NLIHC believes 
that providing funding directly to tenants helps 
decrease these barriers and speeds up the delivery 
of assistance to the lowest-income households. 
The NLIHC often characterizes this approach as 
an ʻinnovative’ way of delivering assistance not 
typically seen in other housing assistance programs.  

ERA programs should also prioritize partnerships 
with organizations serving the disability community 
to better address their needs. Attendees at 
the Hawaiʻi Stakeholder Convening further 
emphasized the need to partner with kupuna-
serving organizations, given the additional mobility 
challenges this community faces. 

The NLIHC discusses other federal initiatives, such 
as a renters’ tax credit, which would provide direct-
to-tenant subsidies for cost-burdened households. 
However, as a caveat, many attendees at the 
Hawaiʻi Stakeholder Convening supported direct-to-
landlord payments, as it encouraged landlords and 
tenants to work together. 

16 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

 
 
 
 
 
 
Best Practices

RENTAL ASSISTANCE USES

•  Using Rent Assistance for Future Rent Payments: 
In addition to rental arrears, U.S. Treasury guidance 
states that ERA funds can be used to cover 
prospective rent, with recertification for future rent 
taking place every three months. Notably, there 
is no national guidance on the amount of rent 
assistance that can be provided to households, 
however, current ERA2 funding allows households 
to receive assistance for up to 18 months.  

Some attendees at the Hawaiʻi Stakeholder 
Convening felt that the time period should 
be shortened to encourage tenants to “wean” 
themselves off of rental assistance or find more 
permanent assistance. 

•  Tenant Relocation, Utilities and Security 

Deposit: ERA can be used for relocation assistance, 
security deposits and application fees, and hotel 

MARKETING, OUTREACH AND TENANT SUPPORT

To increase low-income tenants’ access to rent 
assistance, the NLIHC recommends the following 
outreach and media strategies:  

• 

Engage with trusted community-based 
organizations; 

•  Conduct strategic outreach to landlords; 

and motel stays to assist those who are at risk of or 
have already experienced eviction or displacement. 

•  Housing Counseling and Mediation: ERA funds 
can be used to provide housing stability services 
for renters. These services include landlord and 
tenant mediation, housing counseling and case 
management, services for survivors of domestic 
abuse or human trafficking, legal services or 
attorneys’ fees related to eviction, and specialized 
services for individuals with disabilities or seniors. 
Given this flexibility, the NLIHC encourages ERA 
programs to integrate with landlord-tenant 
mediation programs, as Hawaiʻi did in 2021 

Attendees at the Hawaiʻi Stakeholder Convening 
also emphasized the need for financial literacy 
counseling  and employment services to improve 
renters’ long-term financial well-being.

•  Use data to target populations most-in need of rent 

assistance; 
Embed data collection in program design; 

• 
•  Distribute program information at critical points of 

intervention and directly to renters; and 

•  Provide outreach at eviction court and landlord-

tenant.

KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED • 17

 
 
STRONGER RENTER 
PROTECTIONS THROUGH JUST 
CAUSE EVICTION

LOOPHOLES IN HAWAIʻI’S LANDLORD-TENANT CODE

Hawaiʻi’s landlord-tenant code clearly defines the 
reasons a landlord can pursue eviction of a tenant, 
and provides guidance for both landlords and tenants 
about their respective rights, as well as guidelines for 
landlords who are pursuing eviction.  
When pursuing eviction of a tenant before the end 
of a lease term, landlords can only do so under the 
following conditions:24
• 
• 

The tenant has not paid rent; 
The tenant  has violated the terms of the lease 
agreement; or 
The tenant has caused irreparable damage to the 
unit or endangerment of other tenants on the 
property. 

• 

In some ways, these requirements provide tenants 
with a degree of protection from arbitrary or retaliatory 
evictions, provided they are in good standing with 
rent and in compliance with the terms of their lease. 
Hawaiʻi’s code even contains a provision outlawing 
retaliatory evictions in cases where tenants have either 
lodged official complaints with a government agency 
for health and safety violations, or are demanding 
necessary repairs to their unit.25 

Landlords are required by law to provide written notices 
to tenants to remedy either non-payment of rent or 
violation of the lease terms before pursuing eviction 
proceedings. For non-payment of rent, landlords must 
provide tenants with a five-day notice to pay, while 
violations of lease terms require a 10-day notice to 
correct the violation.

18 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

Despite clearly outlining lawful reasons for eviction, 
Hawaiʻi’s code still allows landlords wide leeway in 
terminating a lease agreement without cause—even 
when tenants are in good standing. For tenants who are 
in month-to-month rental agreements, a landlord can 
remove the tenant from the property without cause by 
issuing a 45-day notice to vacate.26 

Landlords who invoke the 45-day notice are not 
required to provide a reason for the termination and 
may issue the notice at any time during the month-to-
month tenancy. While landlords cannot issue a notice 
to vacate while a lease is in effect, landlords can simply 
wait for the lease to expire at which point the tenancy 
automatically converts to month-to-month, provided 
the rental agreement has not been renewed. 

While the termination of a month-to-month tenancy 
through the 45-day notice does not constitute a legal 
eviction, it effectively has much of the same impact, 
displacing the tenant and forcing them to find new 
housing in roughly a month and a half. 

In this way, month-to-month tenants are extremely 
vulnerable to sudden housing loss, as they can be 
removed from their homes with no justification or 
explanation required. In the absence of stronger renter 
protections, Hawaiʻi’s landlord-tenant code puts renters 
at a significant disadvantage in keeping stable and 
long-term rental housing.

Stronger Protections

JUST CAUSE EVICTION

Hawaiʻi’s COVID-19 renter protections and supports 
were largely successful in keeping vulnerable renters 
housed during the height of the pandemic, but 
those supports did not deliver long-term protection 
to renters. The high demand for housing, coupled 
with a limited supply of affordable units, continues 
to put upward pressure on rents, leaving many of 
Hawaiʻi’s renters with low incomes at continued risk 
of displacement.

Often, the displacement of these renters does not 
register as an official eviction. These “extrajudicial” 
evictions are therefore not reflected in official eviction 
data, and often go undocumented. 

To counter the impact of extrajudicial evictions and 
extend protections to vulnerable renters, many cities, 
states and localities have enacted “just cause” or “good 
cause” eviction policies. These kinds of protections 
create additional stability for renters and encourage 
long-term housing security. This can be especially 
beneficial to those seeking stable housing in high-cost 
rental markets, where landlords are often incentivized 
to seek new tenants to whom they can charge a 
premium for their units.27

Just cause eviction (JCE) policies protect tenants from 
arbitrary, retaliatory or discriminatory evictions by 

housing providers. Under a well-designed JCE policy, 
landlords can only evict tenants for specific causes 
stipulated by law, such as refusal or inability to pay 
rent, intentional damage to the property, or a property 
owner’s intent to occupy the unit or sell the property.28 
In some jurisdictions, these reasons for terminating 
tenancy also apply after the end of the lease term.

In most cases, landlords are required to clearly 
document and present evidence for eviction and 
provide adequate notification of intent to evict. The 
most common reasons included in JCE policies are:
•  Non-payment of rent;
•  Use of premises for illegal activity;
•  Creating a nuisance, disturbing the peace of 

• 

• 

neighbors; 
Violation of lease terms or established rules for the 
property; and
Landlord’s intent to remove the unit from the rental 
market.

In some jurisdictions, when a tenant is evicted through 
no fault of their own—such as when an owner intends 
to occupy the unit themself—some JCE laws require the 
evicting landlord to pay a portion of the tenants moving 
expenses. Policies like this improve housing stability by 
helping tenants handle the added costs of relocating to 
new property.

KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED • 19

Stronger Protections

JCE STATE-BY-STATE COMPARISON

Just cause eviction (JCE) laws have been enacted at 
both the state and city level in multiple communities 
across the country. While JCE laws have most 
commonly been implemented at the municipal 
level, five states have implemented laws designed to 
protect all tenants, regardless of the city they reside in: 
California, Oregon, New Hampshire, New Jersey, and 
Washington. These policies can provide useful models 
for other jurisdictions looking to implement similar 
tenant protections. 

New Jersey

New Jersey was the first state in the country to enact 
a JCE law, having done so in 1974. Bolstered by strong 
local level organizing for rent stabilization policies 
through the New Jersey Tenants Organization, the state 
successfully passed an “eviction for cause” law, which 
outlined seven “good causes” for eviction.29 This bill 
laid the groundwork for what would become common 
features of JCE laws across the country, including 
failure to pay rent, disorderly conduct that creates 
a nuisance, destruction of property and permanent 
retirement of the unit from the rental market.

The bill applies to all types of housing across the state, 
including multi-family buildings, houses, and mobile 
home parks. However, owner-occupied units with no 
more than two dwelling units are exempt from the 
good cause eviction rules established by the law. These 
landlords maintain the right to evict tenants without 
cause and can do so at will.30 

California

Multiple cities in California have passed local JCE 
laws, including San Francisco, Oakland, San Jose, Los 
Angeles and San Diego.31 Recently, the state took action 
by passing AB 1428, the Tenant Protection Act of 2019. 
This law applies to tenants who have occupied a unit 
for 12 months and enumerates 15 just causes for which 
a tenant can be evicted, while also placing caps on rent 
increases from year to year.

20 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

California separates causes for eviction into “at-fault” 
causes and “no-fault” categories. At-fault causes 
include non-payment of rent, engaging in criminal 
activity, and violation of lease terms. No-fault causes 
include intent by the owner or owner’s family member 
to occupy the unit, withdrawal of the unit from the 
rental market, and intent to demolish or substantially 
remodel the property in a way that makes habitation of 
the unit unsafe.32 

In cases where tenants are subject to a no-fault 
eviction, California’s law requires landlords to 
compensate tenants for their moving expenses. 
Landlords engaging in a no-fault eviction must either 
pay one month’s rent to the tenant or waive the last 
month of rent. Exemptions from the law include single-
family owner-occupied housing, duplexes, units built 
within the last 15 years and deed restricted housing 
reserved for low and moderate-income households.

New Hampshire

New Hampshire’s JCE law includes some of the 
more standard just causes for eviction, while also 
including relatively broad exemptions from the law. 
Like many jurisdictions, New Hampshire’s law includes 
exemptions for single family homes and owner-
occupied properties with less than four units.33 

However, one exemption in particular may give 
landlords extremely broad discretion to terminate a 
lease  for “other good causes.” The law defines other 
good causes as any legitimate economic or business 
reason, which does not need to be related to the 
behavior of the tenant. While landlords are required 
to provide written notice to the tenant that any future 
action or inaction could be used as grounds for eviction, 
New Hampshire’s “other good causes” is one of the 
broadest just cause eviction clauses in the nation.

Oregon

Oregon’s tenant law allows a landlord to terminate 
a lease for cause if the tenant commits a material 

Stronger Protections

violation of the lease terms, causes material damage or 
fails to reasonably maintain the property, or fails to pay 
rent. Tenants are given 14 days to correct a violation 
after receiving written notice from the landlord. Other 
protections include prohibitions against retaliatory 
actions, as well as protections against discrimination.34

However, several exemptions were included that allow 
landlords to evict tenants for no-cause. No-cause 
evictions are allowed if tenants have lived in the unit for 
less than one year, reside in owner-occupied housing, 
or live in a duplex or single-family home with an 
accessory dwelling unit. 

For tenants who have lived in their units for more 
than one year, landlords may still evict for no-cause if 
the landlord intends to demolish or convert the unit, 
the landlord’s immediate family member chooses to 
move in, or the landlord has sold the unit to a buyer 
who intends to move in. If tenants are evicted under 
these guidelines, landlords are required to compensate 
tenants with the equivalent of one month’s rent to 
cover moving expenses.

Washington

Washington state’s just cause eviction law applies 

to tenants who are in month-to-month rental 
agreements. Landlords may only evict or discontinue 
tenancy for failure to pay rent, engaging in illegal 
activity, because the landlord or a member of 
landlord’s immediate family intends to occupy the 
unit, or when the owner of a single-family home 
signals their intent to sell the property.35 

Washington’s law largely echoes the just causes outlined 
in other states, but provides additional protections for 
renters who are displaced when a landlord moves into 
the unit, or when the owner of a single-family home sells 
the property. For example, landlords who evict their 
tenants in order to occupy the unit can only do so when 
an equivalent unit is unavailable in the same building 
and if the unit is continually occupied for 60 days by the 
landlord or a member of their immediate family after the 
unit is vacated. 

For owners evicting tenants when selling a single-
family home, owners are required to list the home at a 
reasonable price within 30 days of the property being 
vacated. These stipulations ensure that landlords 
are not acting in bad faith and using the move-in 
clause as false pretext to evict a tenant on arbitrary or 
retaliatory grounds. 

MODELING A JUST CAUSE EVICTION LAW

Based on this state-by-state analysis, just cause 
eviction laws share many similarities in their allowable 
causes for eviction. All include non-payment of rent, 
damage to the property, and violation of the lease 
terms. However, the five laws often differ on the 
exemptions from the law and reasons for removal 
without just cause, with some providing stronger and 
broader protections for renters than others. 

When designing an effective just cause eviction law, 
policymakers should work to maximize the number of 
tenants covered by the law. This can be accomplished 
by limiting the kinds of properties that are exempted 
and carefully considering which removals to allow 
without just cause. 

A strong just cause eviction proposal should apply 
to all renters, regardless whether they rent a single-
family home or apartment, and should allow tenants 
to continue their tenancy at the end of a lease term, 
provided they are in good standing. 

Removal of tenants without just cause should only be 
allowed in a narrow set of circumstances, such as when 
a landlord sells or retires a unit from the rental market 
or intends to move in. To further improve housing 
security for vulnerable renters, policymakers should 
also consider requiring landlords to compensate 
renters for a portion of their moving expenses, when 
removing tenants under these special circumstances. 

KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED • 21

RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO LIMIT HARM CAUSED 
BY EVICTIONS

To increase housing stability for Hawaiʻi’s renters, policymakers should pursue policy interventions that expand 
tenant’s rights and protections, while making it easier for both landlords and renters to settle disputes and stay 
housed. The Hawaiʻi Budget and Policy Center recommends implementing the following: 

1.  Create a permanent rent relief program that can provide relief when renters are in financial crisis.  

Building off of the success of the COVID-19 Emergency Rental Assistance program, Hawaiʻi should invest in 
permanent rent relief. By dedicating funds to a permanent program, both Hawaiʻi’s renters and landlords 
will have a safety net that can provide assistance when renters fall behind on rent due to the loss of a job or 
unforeseen financial expense. A permanent rent relief program would also benefit landlords, who would be 
assured of covering their expenses when renters experience financial hardship. 

2.  Replicate the pre-trial mediation requirements implemented by Act 57.  

The temporary Enhanced Mediation Program implemented by Act 57 was largely successful in helping 
landlords and tenants reach settlement agreements. With 85 percent of mediations through the program 
resulting in a settlement, up from just 23 percent prior to COVID-19, this high success rate is likely due to the 
fact that rental assistance was also available during this time, indicating that mediation would have a higher 
success rate when coupled with financial assistance.  

Requiring pre-trial mediation can divert disputes from the courts, where tenants are often at a disadvantage, 
being significantly less likely to have legal counsel or familiarity with the law. Diverting cases away from the 
courts also saves the judiciary resources that can be dedicated to other needs. 

3.  Implement a state-wide just cause eviction law that guarantees renters in good standing the ability to 

continue tenancy at the end of a lease term.  

Hawaiʻi’s current landlord-tenant code allows landlords to remove a tenant at the end of a lease term simply 
by issuing a 45-day notice. Reforming this provision would provide a greater degree of certainty that tenants 
can remain stably-housed, especially for long-time tenants who have been on month-to-month rental 
agreements for multiple years.  

Furthermore, policymakers should craft a law that compensates renters for their moving expenses when they 
are removed for reasons that are no fault of their own, such as the sale of the unit or intent by the landlord to 
move in.

22 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

 
 
 
 
 
ENDNOTES

“US Cities Where Rents Have Risen the Most”, 

1. 
Stessa, 2022, https://www.stessa.com/blog/cities-
where-rents-have-risen-most/

2. 

ibid

American Community Survey, United States 

3. 
Census Bureau, 2021, https://data.census.gov/
table?q=rent&g=0400000US15&tid=ACSDP1Y2019.
DP04&moe=true

4. 
Emergency Rental Assistance Program, United 
States Department of the Treasury, 2022, https://home.
treasury.gov/policy-issues/coronavirus/assistance-for-
state-local-and-tribal-governments/emergency-rental-
assistance-program

5. 
Assistance for Renters, Hawaiʻi Housing 
Development Corporation, 2022 https://dbedt.hawaii.
gov/hhfdc/assistance-for-renters-emergency-rental-
assistance-era-program

Desmond, Matthew and Rachel Tolbert Kimbro, 

6. 
“Eviction’s Fallout: Housing, Hardship and Health,” 
Oxford University Press, Social Forces, 94(1): 295–324, 
September 2015, https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/
mdesmond/files/desmondkimbro.evictions.fallout.
sf2015_2.pdf

7. 
Desmond, Matthew, Weihua An, Richelle 
Winkler and Thomas Ferriss, “Evicting Children,” 
Oxford University Press, Social Forces, 92(1): 303–327, 
September 2013, https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/
mdesmond/files/social_forces-2013-desmond-303-27.
pdf

8. 

9. 

Desmond, 2015

ibid

10. 

Giesting, Beth, “Good Health Depends 

on Decent Housing: Part 1, The Health and 
Housing Connection,” Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy 
Center, 2021, https://static1.squarespace.
com/static/5ef66d594879125d04f91774/t/6
1ca4dcf0770c217314b2274/1640648147532/
Health+and+Housing+Part+1_FINAL.pdf

Harter, Cynthia L. and John F. R. Harter, “The 

11. 
Link Between Adverse Childhood Experiences and 
Financial Security in Adulthood,” Journal of Family 
Economic Issues, 43(4): 832–842, 2022, https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8428486/

Ziol-Guest, Kathleen and Ariel Kalil, “Frequent 

12. 
Moves in Childhood Can Affect Later Earnings, Work, 
and Education,” MacArthur Foundation, 2014, https://
housingmatters.urban.org/sites/default/files/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/How-Housing-Matters-
Policy-Research-Brief-Frequent-Moves-in-Childhood-
Can-Affect-Later-Earnings-Work-and-Education.pdf

13. 
Cost of Eviction Calculator Summary Report for 
Hawaiʻi, University of Arizona James E. Rogers College 
of Law, 2022

“Hospital Adjusted Expenses per Inpatient Day,” 

14. 
Kaiser Family Foundation, 2020, https://www.kff.org/
health-costs/state-indicator/expenses-per-inpatient-da
y/?currentTimeframe=1&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:
%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D

Learish, Jessica, “The most expensive states for 

15. 
ER visits, ranked,” CBS News, December 4, 2020,
https://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/emergency-room-
visit-cost-most-expensive-states/44

Morris, David M. and James A. Gordon, “The Role 

16. 
of the Emergency Department in the Care of Homeless 
and Disadvantaged Populations,” Emergency Medicine 
Clinics of North America, 24(4): 839–848, November 2006, 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16982342/

KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED • 23

Endnotes

DuMonthier, Asha, “Decriminalizing 

17. 
Homelessness,” ACLU Hawaiʻi, November 2021, https://
www.acluhi.org/sites/default/files/field_documents/
houselessnessreport_0.pdf

25. 

ibid

26. 

ibid

18. 

ibid

Chesney-Lind, Meda and Robert Merce, “Toward 

19. 
a Smaller, Smarter, Correctional System,” University 
of Hawaiʻi Press, The Value of Hawaiʻi 3, 115–118, 
October 2020, https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/
server/api/core/bitstreams/3dafbc33-add4-4229-922f-
b9053f67b1dd/content

Barile, John P.  and Anna S. Pruitt, “City 

20. 
and County of Honolulu’s Housing First Evaluation 
Snapshot,” University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa Department 
of Psychology, Ecological Determinants Lab, May 2017 
https://www.honolulu.gov/rep/site/ohou/ohou_docs/
HousingFirst-Societal-Impacts-Final.pdf

Eviction Lab, “State by State Analysis,” Princeton 

21. 
University, https://evictionlab.org/map/?m=modeled&
c=p&b=efr&s=all&r=states&y=2018&z=2.92&lat=28.86&l
on=-111.48&lang=en&l=15_-166.57_23.66

“Blueprint for a Permanent Emergency Rental 

22. 
Assistance Program,” National Low Income Housing 
Coalition, November 17, 2022, nlihc.org/resource/
nlihc-releases-blueprint-permanent-emergency-rental-
assistance-program

Kong, Ray, Kenna StormoGipson, Abbey Seitz 

23. 
and Gavin Thornton, “Eviction Prevention Through 
Hawaiʻi’s Tenant-Landlord Mediation Program,” 
Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law and Economic 
Justice, October 2022, https://static1.squarespace.
com/static/601374ae84e51e430a1829d8/t/6
345d5fcf7ea1378c43084db/1665521161324/
Eviction+Prevention+Report_FINAL+2.pdf

“Handbook for the Hawaiʻi Residential Landlord-

24. 
Tenant Code, Hawaiʻi State Department of Commerce 
and Consumer Affairs, 2022, https://cca.hawaii.gov/ocp/
files/2022/06/2022-Landlord-Tenant-Handbook-003.pdf

24 • KEEPING HAWAI‘I HOUSED

“Equitable Development Toolkit: Just Cause 

27. 
Eviction Controls,” PolicyLink, 2022,  https://allincities.
org/toolkit

28. 
“Just Cause Eviction Policies,” Local Housing 
Solutions, National Community of Practice on Local 
Housing Policy, https://localhousingsolutions.org/
housing-policy-library/just-cause-eviction-policies/

Baar, Kenneth K, “Rent Control in the 1970s: 

29. 
The Case of the New Jersey Tenants Movement,” 
Hastings Law Journal, 28(3): 631–683, 1977, https://
repository.uchastings.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=2491&context=hastings_law_journal

30. 
NJ Rev Stat § 2A:18-61.1 (2013), https://law.
justia.com/codes/new-jersey/2013/title-2a/section-
2a-18-61.1/

“Local Just Cause and Eviction Retaliation 

31. 
Laws,” The Policy Surveillance Program, 2019, https://
lawatlas.org/datasets/local-eviction-protections

Cal. Civ. Code § 1946.2, https://casetext.

32. 
com/statute/california-codes/california-civil-
code/division-3-obligations/part-4-obligations-
arising-from-particular-transactions/title-5-hiring/
chapter-2-hiring-of-real-property/section-19462-
termination-without-just-cause-of-tenancy-after-
continuous-and-lawful-occupation

NH Rev Stat § 540:2, http://www.gencourt.state.

33. 
nh.us/rsa/html/LV/540/540-2.htm

ORS, Chapter 90, https://www.oregonlegislature.

34. 
gov/bills_laws/ors/ors090.html

RCW, Title 59, https://apps.leg.wa.gov/rcw/

35. 
default.aspx?Cite=59