Title: Policy in Perspective 2024
Date: unknown
URL: https://hiappleseed.org/publications/policy-in-perspective-2024
PDF: https://hiappleseed.org/s/Policy-In-Perspective-2024_FINAL.pdf
============================================================

H AWA IʻI   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

POLICY

I

N

PERSPECTIVE

LOOKING FORWARD FROM THE 2024 STATE LEGISLATIVE SESSION

 
H AWA IʻI   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

www.hiappleseed.org

Authors: Hawaiʻi Appleseed Staff

Hawaiʻi Appleseed is committed to a more socially and economically just Hawaiʻi, where everyone has genuine 
opportunities to achieve economic security and fulfill their potential. We change systems to address inequity 
and foster greater opportunity by conducting data analysis and research to address income inequality, educating 
policymakers and the public, engaging in collaborative problem solving and coalition building, and advocating 
for policy and systems change.

The work of Hawaiʻi Appleseed is about people. The issues we work on—housing, food, wages, mobility, the state 
budget and taxation, and racial and indigenous equity—are important because they ensure people have access 
to shelter, sustenance, and the means to survive and thrive individually and collectively. Addressing these issues 
requires the knowledge and expertise of the people that have first-hand experience and live with the adverse 
consequences of our flawed systems.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Forward

Executive Summary

Tax & Budget

Affordable Housing

Food Equity

Transportation Equity

Endnotes

3

4 

6

12

18 

23 

26

Copyright © 2024 Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice. All rights reserved. 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1180, Honolulu, HI 96813

2 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

FORWARD

Every year, Hawaiʻi Appleseed dedicates considerable staff time and resources to the state legislative session, 
a process of lawmaking that speeds by in a mere 60 days. This narrow window provides advocates, lawmakers 
and community members with the opportunity to work together to make bold, systemic changes to the way 
we organize our society for the betterment of all Hawaiʻi’s people. The challenges and roadblocks that emerge 
during each session are significant, and every year we try to become more skilled at overcoming them. 

“Policy in Perspective” is an annual report that looks back at the work Appleseed staff and coalition partners put 
into advancing the issues that we have identified as priorities for creating a Hawaiʻi that puts its people first. By 
examining both our successes and our shortcomings, we attempt to draw lessons from our experience, identify 
patterns in the obstacles we face, and create a record of the impact our work has on the public policy process. 

This report is for us, and for you, to reference and return to as we push forward together toward a brighter 
future for us all.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 3

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

BY COMMITTING TO TRANSPARENCY, PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT, AND ACCOUNTABILITY, WE 
CAN CREATE A SHARED PROSPERITY AND A THRIVING, UNITED HAWAIʻI.

EFFECTIVE POLICY MAKING is grounded in respect 
for all people, open dialogue, and evidence-based 
decisions. These principles promote social cohesion 
and ensure policies are based on facts, designed to 
achieve shared, long-term prosperity. In recent years, 
Hawaiʻi has seen successful examples of this approach. 

In 2022, a collaboration between public and private 
sector leaders helped address the economic struggles 
of many Hawaiʻi residents. This resulted in historic 
investments in affordable housing, a tax credit for 
working families, and progress toward universal 
preschool.1 Similarly, when the COVID-19 pandemic 
threatened mass evictions, Hawaiʻi brought together 
diverse housing stakeholders to craft solutions, 
creating one of the nation’s most effective responses.2

However, in 2024, the state legislature took a different 
approach and enacted the largest tax cut in the state’s 
history without a single public hearing or any input 
from the public.3 

Initially designed to provide equitable tax relief at a 
cost of $150 million annually, the bill was drastically 
altered behind closed doors in the final days of the 
legislative session.4 The overhauled bill emerged from 
the conference committee with a price tag that will 
cost the state $656 million in 2025, before growing to 
$1.4 billion annually by 2031—nearly 10 percent of 
Hawaiʻi’s general fund tax revenues.5 

When Hawaiʻi faced a similar-sized budget deficit 
during the Great Recession (a 10 percent loss between 
2008–09, amounting to $525 million at the time) the 
state implemented “Furlough Fridays,” closing all 
state offices including public schools one day a week, 
and slashing behavioral health and social services.6 

Those cuts wreaked havoc on Hawaiʻi’s families and 
the public education system, and we still have yet to 
truly recover.

While the bill provides a helpful boost to struggling 
families, it gives high earners a much larger tax cut—
one that our state likely cannot afford. While the 
bottom 20 percent of earners would receive $440 on 
average, the top 1 percent will stand to gain nearly 
$12,800 each year.7 

This is the bill that was signed into law as Act 046 
(2024), representing a sweeping decision that was 
made by fewer than 10 legislators in the conference 
committee, excluding public engagement and 
independent expert analysis.

Not only that, it happened at the end of a legislative 
session that began with lawmakers publicly fretting 
over the state budget and asking state department 
heads to prepare for the possibility of 10–15 percent 
cuts in spending on education and human services.8 
While some lawmakers hailed the tax cut as “historic,”9 
the process eroded public trust by excluding input 
from the very people the decision will impact.

A thoughtful discussion on tax policy would 
acknowledge that tax cuts can help struggling 
families, but should also consider more effective 
ways to allocate resources. For example, directing 
$84 million toward a $650-per-child tax credit would 
benefit 176,000 children in Hawaiʻi working families.10 
A $23 million investment could provide free school 
meals to all public school students.11 And $13 million 
could fund rent relief and mediation to prevent 2,500 
evictions each year.12 These alternatives reflect more 
equitable and efficient ways to support those in need.

4 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Hawaiʻi’s tax policy should aim to improve economic 
security for all residents. This requires a return 
to transparent, inclusive governance that values 
equity. Progressive tax reforms that foster a shared 
prosperity, alongside investments in affordable 
housing and essential services, will help Hawaiʻi 
address its most pressing challenges.

policy that shifts the blame for traffic violence onto 
pedestrians without actually keeping them any 
safer. Ending this practice would actually save the 
government money that could be invested into better 
multimodal infrastructure to help meet transportation  
goals, yet the Hawaiʻi State Department of 
Transportation opposed the policy.

Lack of affordable housing continues to drive 
houselessness and outmigration, straining the local 
economy and diminishing community cohesion. Yet, 
although 2024 saw progress in zoning reforms and 
infrastructure financing, many proposals aimed at 
alleviating the current housing crisis were sidelined. 

Similarly, food insecurity continues to present another 
urgent problem for a growing number of working 
families in Hawaiʻi. Yet, while the legislature did invest 
in food access policies like DA BUX and summer-EBT, 
it failed to pass Universal Free School Meals, one 
of the most effective ways to increase educational 
attainment while combating childhood hunger, which 
has lasting detrimental effects on keiki.

On the transportation equity front, Hawaiʻi Appleseed 
launched its forray into the issue with a bill to 
decriminalize “jaywalking,” an archaic enforcement 

Trust plays a critical role in effective governance. 
Societies with high levels of trust experience stronger 
economic growth, lower transaction costs, and greater 
civic engagement.13 Trust fosters social capital and 
leads to better outcomes in areas like public health, 
education, and infrastructure. Conversely, the 
erosion of trust—through closed-door decisions and 
inequitable policies—undermines social cohesion and 
deepens divisions.

When we build trust, we lay the foundation for 
a stronger Hawaiʻi. Building trust in our public 
institutions and within our community requires 
embracing past examples of successful, inclusive, 
and collaborative problem-solving. By committing to 
transparency, public engagement and accountability, 
we can create a shared prosperity and a thriving, 
united Hawaiʻi. 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 5

TAX & BUDGET

Devin Thomas, Hawaiʻi Appleseed’s senior analyst for tax and 
budget policy, speaks at a Keiki Credit rally on Valentine’s 
Day, 2024. // Christy MacPherson, Hawaiʻi Appleseed

As Beth Giesting, Director Emeritus of the Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center, wrote in Hawaiʻi Appleseed’s 2024–25 
Budget Primer, “the state budget is a statement of our values. It’s where we invest in programs that increase 
fairness, opportunity and wellbeing for all.”14 Programs and policy that put people first is the heart of what 
Hawaiʻi Appleseed fights for at the state legislature every year. The work Appleseed does on tax and budget 
policy therefore impacts the work we do in all other areas. 

Going into the 2024 legislative session, Hawaiʻi Appleseed was part of a coalition effort to create a state Child 
Tax Credit, and to reform the state capital gains tax to help pay for it. This effort leaned heavily on Hawaiʻi 
Appleseed research done in 2023 by Devin Thomas, senior analyst for tax and budget policy.

In 2024, lawmakers had an opportunity to champion tax policies that equitably distribute the tax burden, 
ensuring everyone contributes fairly to support vital public resources and systems—the foundations that enable 
economic success for all. However, the tax policies that advanced the furthest in the legislature leaned toward 
debunked “trickle-down” economic approaches that prioritize tax cuts for the wealthy, despite extensive 
research demonstrating that such measures fail to reduce poverty, improve wages for average workers, or 
promote broad economic benefits.15

Lawmakers advanced a series of bills that would have doubled the amount of money the very richest 0.1 
percent of Hawaiʻi families could exempt from the Hawaiʻi estate tax—further concentrating wealth in the hands 

6 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

TAX & BUDGET

Cover image, “Concentrating Wealth” // Hawaiʻi Appleseed

Cover image, “Hawaiʻi Budget Primer, 2024–25” // Hawaiʻi 
Appleseed

of the elite few. Hawaiʻi Appleseed and its partners quickly mobilized opposition to these bills, and our tax and 
budget team developed a policy brief outlining the serious threat this concentration of wealth would pose for 
the economy. Thanks to the public pressure mobilized against these bills, these policies stalled out toward the 
end of session. 

Although the proposed estate tax cut stopped short of passage, another tax bill that will have extraordinary 
consequences—House Bill 2404—passed. Signed into law as Act 046 by Governor Green on June 3, the bill 
enacts sweeping tax cuts for people of all income levels, but most of the benefit goes to those at the top of the 
income scale. 

Notably, the bill the governor signed emerged from the conference committee stage of the legislative process 
a significantly different measure than what Gov. Green’s office proposed at the beginning of the 2024 session. 
Conference committee does not allow for any public input, and the negotiations are largely carried out behind 
closed doors. This means the public had no say in the final bill or its provisions. While the governor’s original 
proposal would have cost $150 million per year, the bill that emerged from the conference committee process 
will cost the state an estimated $1.2–1.4 billion per year in foregone revenue by 2031, once the changes to the 
income tax are fully phased-in.

It is unclear whether the state will be able to afford this monumental cost. The fully phased-in tax cut will 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 7

 
TAX & BUDGET

swallow up about 10 percent of Hawaiʻi’s general fund tax revenues. Consequently, as the bill phases in over the 
next 5 years, it may limit the money that can be put towards the state’s chronically underfunded programs and 
services. Low-income residents will be affected the most by a decline in revenue, as many of them may rely on 
government programs to help make ends meet. 

Under the new law, those same folks in the bottom 20 percent of the income scale will see an average of just 
$440 in tax breaks in 2031; perhaps enough to help with a bill, or back-to-school supplies, but nowhere near 
enough to change their standard of living. Meanwhile the top 1 percent will see an average tax break of $12,800. 
The biggest dollars will go to wealthy households who already enjoy preferential tax policies like Hawaiʻi’s 
flawed capital gains tax,16 or the massive estate tax exemptions already provided by the federal government 
through the Trump-era Tax Cuts & Jobs Act.17

In the event of lower-than-expected tax collections, economic recessions, or disasters like the Maui Wildfires, 
the state would likely have a smaller cushion of funds to fall back on. Any major shortfalls would likely require 
Hawaiʻi to decrease its funding for key priorities, just as it did during the Great Recession. 

The 2008 Great Recession demonstrated the potential consequences of a revenue loss similar in magnitude 
to the forecast for HB 2404. State departments underwent budget cuts that seriously compromised their 
existing programs and services. To clamp down on the cost of teacher salaries, the Department of Education 
canceled school sessions on its “Furlough Fridays.” In addition, the Department of Human Services was dealt 
a $111 million budget cut that affected healthcare and cash payments to families, services for low-income and 
disabled adults, and contracts with non-profit organizations.18 Our state is still—to this day—recovering from 
the adverse impacts these cuts had on our educational attainment and public health.

Priority Measures

•  HB2404 (Act 046): This bill doubles the amount that can be claimed by the standard deduction, a welcome 
change that will help working families that are burdened with the high cost of living in Hawaiʻi. However, 
at the same time, HB2404’s tax bracket adjustments will give away millions to households that are by no 
means struggling to pay for basic necessities. 

HB2404 will steadily shift Hawaiʻi’s income tax brackets (and rates) upward. This will reduce income taxes 
for nearly all taxpayers, but most of the total tax cut will go to high-earners. For example, in the first year 
alone, the top 1 percent of taxpayers will receive a tax break of over $6,000 on average, compared to just 
$335 for the bottom 20 percent.19 

HB2404 reflects recurring debates surrounding tax policy, highlighting the stark contrast between those 
who can easily meet all their needs and the working families who form the backbone of Hawaiʻi’s economy 
but struggle to make ends meet. Focusing on providing meaningful relief to those who need it most to 
achieve stability and security will benefit everyone, not just our most struggling families.  

In addition to its mixed efficacy in helping working families make ends meet, HB2404 also had the effect 
of sidelining other, more effective tax policies, such as the proposed state Child Tax Credit, which were 
dismissed citing a lack of funds. 

•  HB1662: This bill would have created a state Child Tax Credit (CTC) for Hawaiʻi, focused on helping working 
families afford their everyday costs. The expanded federal CTC lifted 2.9 million children out of poverty 

8 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

 
 
 
Figure 1. Percentage of Income from Capital Gains vs Income from Work in Hawaiʻi, by Income Level (2021)

TAX & BUDGET

2.3%

97.7%

33.1%

Income from Work

66.9%

Income from Capital Gains

Income Range: $75,000–$100,000

Income Range: $400,000 and above

during the pandemic, reducing child poverty by 40 percent in 2021.20 Unfortunately, Congress allowed the 
expansion to lapse, and much of the gains made against poverty have since been lost. A total of 15 states 
have already implemented their own state-level CTCs to fill in the gap left by the federal expansion lapse, 
and these states have been able to hold on to the anti-poverty benefits of the policy as a result.21 

While HB1662 received an outpouring of supportive testimony from a diverse cohort of advocates, union 
members and concerned community members,22 it was deferred in the Senate Committee on Health and 
Human Services after crossing over from the State House. 

•  HB1660: This bill aimed to raise revenue for state services by reforming the capital gains tax on investment 
income. Currently, Hawaiʻi taxes capital gains at a flat rate of 7.25 percent, even for those in the highest 
income bracket who would otherwise pay the top income tax rate of 11 percent. For high-income taxpayers, 
capital gains often make up a significant share of their total income.23 This structure effectively provides 
wealthier taxpayers with a preferential tax advantage, while lower-income individuals, who rarely benefit 
from capital gains, face a higher tax rate on such income if they were to have it. 

HB1660 would have closed this loophole by taxing capital gains at the same, progressively increasing rates 
as ordinary income from work, making our tax system more fair and generating what had been estimated at 
$167 million in new revenue each year.24 The House Committee on Finance passed this bill, but the Senate 
Committee on Ways & Means declined to schedule it for a hearing.

Change Analysis

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 9

 
 
TAX & BUDGET

In addition to the research done ahead of the 2023 legislative session on the Child Tax Credit and capital gains tax 
reform proposals, Hawaiʻi Appleseed produced two additional reports prior to the 2024 session. The first analyzes 
the current economic situation for working families in Hawaiʻi to demonstrate the serious need for government 
investments, and the other provides updated proposals to lawmakers to equitably generate new revenue to fund 
investments in those same working families. 

“The High Cost of Low Wages,” lifts up the major economic and social problems that occur when working 
families are not earning enough to cover their basic needs. Using a wide range of data and statistics, the 
report paints a picture of the dire situation many low- and middle-income Hawaiʻi households find themselves 
in today as they struggle to afford the highest-in-the-nation cost of living on wages that fall far short of the 
need. The report looks to the future, as it outlines the major costs to our keiki’s health, development and 
socioeconomic success that come with growing up in an income-insecure household.

Key Findings: 

•  Hawaiʻi’s lack of economic mobility imposes a high cost on our keiki through loss of future economic 

productivity, poorer health outcomes, and less educational attainment.  

• 

A state-level Child Tax Credit, an indexed minimum wage that automatically adjusts to inflation and other cost 
increases, and increased dedicated revenue to affordable housing (the largest cost in a household budget) 
would go a long way toward helping Hawaiʻi working families afford the high cost of living and avoid poverty.

“Funding our Future” outlines strategies the state can adopt to increase tax revenue in ways that do not adversely 
impact low- or even middle-income households, targeting only those that can better afford to pay instead. 

Even before the passage of HB2404, Hawaiʻi was already dealing with significant budget strain from the Lahaina 
Wildfire recovery effort, increasing fixed or obligated costs,25 and a heavily tourism-dependent economy not yet 
fully recovered from the COVID-19 pandemic. With lawmakers naturally cautious about spending money under 
the projected outlook, but the need to spend money on helping working families so great, this brief provided 
lawmakers with a menu of options for solving this dilemma in a fair and equitable manner.

Key Revenue Raising Recommendations: 

•  Create a new individual income tax bracket (additional $16–$64 million per year); 

• 

Increase the capital gains tax (less than an additional $87 million per year now that Act 046 has adjusted 
income tax brackets upward); 

•  Reform the conveyance tax on mansions (additional $103–$300 million per year); 

•  Close the estate tax loophole (varies widely each year, but somewhere around $19–$57 million per year); 

• 

• 

Increase corporate tax rates (additional $200 million per year); and 

Implement worldwide combined reporting (additional $38 million per year).

As previously discussed, Hawaiʻi Appleseed also produced a policy brief (“Concentrating Wealth”) in response to 
the push to cut the estate tax. The brief laid out why HB2653 would be detrimental to Hawaiʻi’s budget and people.

10 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

TAX & BUDGET

Table 1. Key Hawaiʻi Appleseed Tax & Budget Communications Products, 2024 Legislative Session

Title

Type

Date Published

Congress considers making the federal Child Tax Credit refundable; Hawaiʻi 
considers Keiki Credit

Blog Post

Feb. 14, 2024

Trickle-down estate tax break bills are bad policy for Hawaiʻi

Blog Post

March 13, 2024

The big budget trouble with HB2404’s over-broad and sweeping tax cuts

Blog Post

May 29, 2024

Hawaiʻi’s elected leaders buy-in to costly “trickle-down” myth

Blog Post

June 13, 2024

Fund Our Future, Progressive Revenue Raisers 2024

Fact Sheet

Jan. 2024

Rebalance Hawaiʻi’s upside-down tax code to achieve prosperity for all

Op-Ed

Jan. 23, 2024

Lawmakers should embrace keiki credit

Op-Ed

Feb. 13, 2024

What do estate tax cuts for the wealthy say about Hawaiʻi’s priorities?

Op-Ed

April 5, 2024

Hawaiʻi’s low wages relative to its cost of living put a serious strain on society, 
local economy

Press Release

Dec. 13, 2023

Hawaiʻi’s tax system makes inequality worse, national study finds

Press Release

Jan. 9, 2024

Estate tax giveaway HB2653 would further concentrate wealth, drive inequality

Press Release

April 17, 2024

2024 Hawaiʻi Legislature Tax & Budget Policy Update #1

Video Update

Feb. 28, 2024

Hawaiʻi Appleseed recorded nine earned media pieces related to the 2024 legislative session focused on taxes and budget.

In 2024, Hawaiʻi Appleseed centered its efforts to build people-power around the issue of taxes and budget policy 
on the state Child Tax Credit, or “Keiki Credit.” This included efforts to reach working moms, who would be core 
beneficiaries of a state child tax credit. Hawaiʻi Appleseed and its coalition partners held a Valentine’s Day rally in 

support of the Keiki Credit that included both grass-tops partners and legislative champions, 
as well as working moms and other grassroots supporters.

YES
HI TAX
FAIRNESS

The Hawaiʻi Tax Fairness Coalition continues to act as a mobilization tool for sending out 
frequent, tax & budget-specific newsletter alerts for testimony and other legislative process 
actions to its list of a few hundred members. 

Sign up for tax and budget-related action alerts from the coaliton here.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 11

AFFORDABLE HOUSING

Hawaiʻi Appleseed staff and coalition 
partners particiapte in a Housing 
Concerns Listening Session in 
Kalihi on February 3, 2024. // Keith 
Webster, Faith Action for Community 
Equity

Lack of affordable housing has been a critical issue for Hawaiʻi residents for more than 50 years.26 The 
past decade has seen the problem grow significantly, with the gap between housing costs and wages and 
affordability widening.27 The devastation brought by the Lahaina wildfires made things even worse. In addition 
to the more than 100 lives lost, the wildfire destroyed some 3,000 precious housing units, including 142 low-
income affordable units at Front Street Apartments Hawaiʻi Appleseed helped preserve as affordable through 
2051.28 Yet housing, Hawaiʻi’s biggest cost-of-living policy challenge, saw only mixed results in 2024.

The 2024 legislative session saw the introduction of close to 300 bills related to housing, reflecting the urgency 
and complexity of the issue. While significant progress was made with some key legislation, measures aimed at 
direct assistance for those most affected by the housing crisis were often sidelined.

Instead, the focus remained predominantly on supply-side solutions to the housing shortage. For example, 
SB3202 takes aim at exclusionary zoning rules by allowing two accessory dwelling units (ADUs) by right on 

12 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING

residential property, while HB2090 allows for commercial properties and zones to be used for residential 
purposes. Both measures look to increase the overall number of housing units available in the hopes of bringing 
down costs by increasing supply. Both bills were signed into law by Governor Green.

While SB3202 and HB 2090 are important for long-term stability as the state works to meet future demand, they 
do nothing to address the immediate needs of renters facing housing insecurity today. By contrast, demand-
side policies look to stabilize the market today by increasing access to existing housing and keeping people 
stably-housed long-term. 

Based in part on Hawaiʻi Appleseed research29 into a successful pandemic-era rent-relief and mediation 
program, SB3332 would have extended the notice period for end-of-rental agreements, and would have 
required landlords to engage in mediation before filing in eviction court. HB1339, meanwhile, would have given 
tenants longer notice of a landlord’s intent to raise rent or not renew a leasing agreement. Neither bill made it 
to the governor, but measures like these are critical to protecting local residents’ ability to access housing in 
today’s global market. 

Funding a permanent rent relief fund should be a centerpiece of the demand-side of the housing policy 
continuum. If we continue to overlook essential measures that would provide immediate housing stability to 
Hawaiʻi residents, while only focusing on supply-side policies, we could very well end up with more housing 
units that are nevertheless still out of reach for the average resident. We know this because it’s been a 
fundamental problem with Hawaiʻi’s housing policy for decades.30 We must remember to implement policies 
that ensure the new units we build or restore that come onto the market are actually accessible and affordable.

It’s not just the moral imperative that informs this belief: our lack of accessible and affordable housing is what 
is driving our houselessness and outmigration epidemics, both of which are putting an increasing drain our 
local economy, our quality of life, our community cohesiveness, and even Hawaiʻi’s unique culture itself.

Priority Measures

• 

SB3202 (Act 039): This bill restricts counties from perpetuating exclusionary zoning by allowing up to two 
ADUs, by right, on residential property (provided the necessary infrastructure is in place to support the 
units). Ultimate decision-making authority over projects is retained by the counties. 

•  HB2090 (Act 037): This bill allows for commercially-zoned properties to be used for residential purposes 

(again, infrastructure allowing). 

•  HB1763 (Act 235): This bill closes a financing loophole within the state’s Hawaiʻi Housing Financing & 

Development Corporation (HHFDC). Currently, Rental Housing Revolving Fund (RHRF) loans are subject to 
an artificially low interest rate that is incredibly beneficial to the developer. These loans can be forgiven for 
almost any reason. This has created a financial drain of public money for projects that are successful and 
profitable. Act 235 allows for loan forgiveness only if the corporation forecloses on a project, effectively 
removing language which previously allowed RHRF to function as a grant program instead of a loan program. 

• 

SB2133 (Act 034): This bill allows HHFDC to issue bonds for housing project infrastructure and to finance 
the development of regional state infrastructure projects. Investment in infrastructure upgrades is long 
overdue for Hawaiʻi. Infrastructure is vital for housing construction, and its deficit is a major factor in 
slowing down project development statewide. It will take a multi-billion dollar investment over years to 
secure all the freshwater, wastewater, and road upgrades necessary to meet Hawaii’s housing needs. Having 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 13

AFFORDABLE HOUSING

the state take charge of financing and developing regional infrastructure projects takes the burden off of 
developers, and can create better opportunities to develop housing in areas closer to jobs. 

• 

SB2066 (Act 038): This bill allows 201H exemptions to go to projects which commit 100 percent of the 
units exclusively for qualified residents for the entire life of the project. 201H exemptions are sought after 
by developers to make the development of housing quicker and less costly. Currently, 201H requires a 
50 percent +1 affordable housing requirement with a price restriction period anywhere from 2–30 years, 
depending on the project.  

201H has been good for development, but the affordability requirement typically creates smaller sized units 
that are only $200-$300K cheaper than market rate, and rarely exceed two bedrooms. This bill could give 
developers the opportunity to access 201H benefits without affordability requirements, as long as all units 
are sold to current residents for the lifetime of the building, though many questions about how this would 
play out remain. 

•  HB2364/SB3053: This bill would have increased the conveyance tax on investment properties and would 
have dedicated a portion of the funds to regional infrastructure projects. This proposal would have 
increased the tax on home sales for properties which are sold at $2 million and above for non-owner-
occupied units, and at $4 million and above for owner-occupied units.  

14 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING

The proposal would have also created a dedicated source of funding for the Dwelling Unit Revolving Fund 
to commit to regional infrastructure projects. The current practice for infrastructure upgrades is to have 
private entities do them piecemeal, which is inefficient and costly. This proposal would have encouraged 
the state to do regional infrastructure projects and work towards filling the more than $1 billion gap in 
necessary infrastructure for housing development.  

•  HB2642/SB3332: These companion bills would have extended the period of notice for ending a rental 
agreement, and would have required landlords to engage in mediation prior to initiating eviction 
proceedings. The proposal did not include rent relief. SB3332 borrows from the success of landlord tenant 
mediation paired with rent relief of Act 57 to stabilize fire survivors in Maui county. 

This is the third iteration of Act 57 (2021), a temporary, pandemic-era policy that made mediation 
mandatory between landlord and tenant before a formal eviction process. This process required both 
parties to come together in a less intense setting than court with the goal of coming to an agreement that 
avoids an eviction. Act 57 featured a rent relief fund that ensured landlords could be made whole, which 
our research shows dramatically improved the success of the program. Neither bill in 2024 included a rent 
relief fund attached to the mediation requirement, despite compelling testimony from multiple community 
partners explaining why it is so critical. 

•  HB1339/SB1464: These bills would have extended the notice period for a landlord to notify fixed-term 

tenants of their intent to raise rent or terminate a rental agreement. Extending this notice period would 
give renters a better ability to financially prepare for a rent increase, or to look for alternative living 
arrangements without undue cost to either party. 

•  HB2007: This bill would have allowed religious, educational and medical institutions to build dwelling 

units on their lands, as long as those lands are within the urban land use districts. Sometimes referred to as 
YIGBY, or Yes In God’s Back Yard, this policy is a growing trend on the U.S. continent. Nonprofit institutions, 
particularly religious ones, often have excess land and sometimes have a desire to assist in creating housing 
opportunities for the community. Our antiquated zoning rules currently restrict their ability to do so.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 15

 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING

Change Analysis

Hawaiʻi Appleseed Housing Policy Director Arjuna Heim created a new policy brief focused on options for 
reforming the state’s conveyance tax on the sale of multi-million dollar mansions. “Preserving Hawaiʻi” 
compares multiple proposals to increase the tax paid when mansions are sold as a means of both generating 
revenue earmarked for affordable housing (and infrastructure) development, as well as to discourage the kind 
of investment speculation in Hawaiʻi’s real-estate market that drives up prices for everyone. 

Since lowering housing costs is the most important way to keep Hawaiʻi families living and thriving in here in 
the islands, the report title drives at the heart of the issue. The brief outlines the pros and cons of each proposal 
using detailed analysis of sales and tax data from the state to give lawmakers an accurate expectation of the 
impacts of such a policy. 

Key Findings:

•  Projected housing demand estimates that some 

4,000–5,000 additional affordable rental units must 
be added to our housing supply each year for the 
next 5 years to meet residents’ needs.  

• 

• 

A review of projects approved by the Hawaiʻi 
Housing and Finance Development Corporation 
(HHFDC) over the last 5 years shows ongoing and 
growing demand for funds from the Rental Housing 
Revolving Fund (RHRF). In all 5 of those years, the 
RHRF ran up against the $38 million allocation cap 
from the conveyance tax. 

In 2022, HHFDC approved over $320 million of RHRF 
to 13 projects which will eventually produce 1,989 
affordable units, dependent on permitting and other 
approval processes. 

•  Hawaiʻis also need to increase its investments into 
the Dwelling Unit Revolving Fund (DURF), which is 
used by the state to develop the infrastructure it 
needs—sewer, electrical, roadways—to meet our 
housing demand. 

16 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

Cover image, “Preserving Hawaiʻi” // Hawaiʻi Appleseed

 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING

• 

Increasing conveyance tax rates, removing caps on the RHRF (and Land Conservation Fund, or LCF), and 
creating a dedicated DURF fund, can provide millions of dollars to addressing some of the most pressing 
barriers to providing affordable housing to residents today.

Hawaiʻi Appleseed also continued to rely on research done in both 2022 and 2023 around the highly successful 
Act 057 (2021) pandemic-era eviction mediation and rent relief program in attempts to get a permanent 
program established.

Table 2. Key Hawaiʻi Appleseed Affordable Housing Communications Products, 2024 Legislative Session

Title

Type

Date Published

Leverage Hawaiʻi’s conveyance tax to equitably fund affordable housing, land 
conservation and infrastructure needs

Blog Post

Feb. 22, 2024

A mix of progress and missed opportunities: affordable housing efforts at the 
2024 legislature

Blog Post

July 11, 2024

Rethinking Hawaiʻi’s conveyance tax

Op-Ed

March 17, 2024

Allow more ʻohana housing to ease crisis

Op-Ed

March 24, 2024

Hawaiʻi’s conveyance tax can be an effective tool to address our housing crisis

Press Release

Feb. 28, 2024

2024 Hawaiʻi Legislature Housing Policy Update #1

Video Update

Feb. 13, 2024

Hawaiʻi Appleseed recorded six earned media pieces related to the 2024 legislative session focused on affordable housing.

In 2024, Hawaiʻi Appleseed’s efforts to bring people-power to the legislature on the issue of housing 
affordability were focused on rent relief and eviction mediation, with important emerging partnerships like 
the Hawaiʻi Workers Center’s Maui Tenants and Workers Association, and the Honolulu Tenants Union helping 
to elevate the serious issue of tenant protections and rent stabilization, both critical to a healthy housing 
ecosystem. Hawaiʻi Appleseed also held a housing-focused listening session that led to a partnership with the 
tenants of Kuhio Park Terrace (KPT) and other social service provider organizations rooted in Kalihi.

The Hawaiʻi Housing Affordability Coalition, our vehicle for community-driven change, 
continues to meet regularly throughout the year to plan strategy, host workshops and 
organize for effective housing policy. Recently, the coalition has expanded its efforts to 
include county-level housing policy, ensuring continued engagement and meaningful work 
beyond the legislative session. 

Sign up for affordable housing-related action alerts from the coaliton here.

HIHAC

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 17

FOOD EQUITY

Juniors from Castle High 
School in Kāneʻohe attended 
a State House education 
committee hearing to 
support a Universal Free 
School Meals bill in 2024. 
The committee passed 
the policy, as did the State 
House, but the proposal 
died in the Senate without 
a hearing. // Will Caron, 
Hawaiʻi Appleseed

Hawaiʻi faces some of the highest food prices in the nation. 31 This, coupled with stagnant wages and soaring 
housing costs makes it increasingly difficult for households to make ends meet and afford nutritious foods. The 
sobering statistic that 1 in 3 families in Hawaiʻi is food insecure32 underscores the urgent need for robust policy 
interventions to ensure that all residents have access to adequate and nutritious food. 

Hawaiʻi Appleseed’s work around ending hunger for Hawaiʻi’s residents is critical, a fact underscored by 
the enthusiasm with which those most impacted by hunger participated in the 2024 legislative process. It’s 
challenging for regular everyday folks to participate at the legislature. Lawmaking takes place during regular 
work and school hours, and the folks for whom these policies can mean a big difference in quality of life are 
often those least able to access the decision-making process. 

That’s why it was so inspiring to see some two dozen Castle High School students attend both the House 
Education and Finance committee hearings to testify in support of HB1775. The bill would have implemeted a 
Universal Free School Meals (UFSM) program, a policy that would directly impact their lives in profound ways: 

18 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

FOOD EQUITY

better health and growth, better learning and brain development, better family and social life.33 Their personal 
stories about struggling with food insecurity both at home and at school were powerful, and greatly contributed 
to both House committees moving the policy forward. Unfortunately, the bill died in the Senate when it was not 
given a hearing.  

But there was also some good news on the food front: our collective efforts secured funding for the Summer 
Electronic Benefits Transfer for Children Program (Summer EBT) through summer 2025. The inaugural Summer 
EBT program is crucial as it provides additional nutritional support to children who rely on school meals 
during the academic year, but face increased risk of hunger during the summer months. And the state budget 
now includes a $1.5 million annual recurring allocation to support the DA BUX program, helping more families 
access healthy, locally sourced food.

While some progress was made, we must redouble our efforts next session, and do more to bring in students, 
workers and family members who can directly testify to the urgent need for policies that promote food equity.

Priority Measures

•  HB2430 (Act 155): This bill secures funding for the Summer Electronic Benefits Transfer for Children 

Program (Summer EBT) through summer 2025. The inaugural Summer EBT program is crucial as it provides 
additional nutritional support to children who rely on school meals during the academic year but face 
increased risk of hunger during the summer months. With this funding in place, we can ensure that more 
than 100,000 vulnerable keiki will receive the nutrition they need even when school is out this summer, 
helping to bridge the gap and reduce summertime food insecurity. 

•  HB2771: This bill sought to secure matching funding for the DA BUX Double Up Food Bucks Program. This 

innovative program helps Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) participants by doubling the 
value of their benefits when purchasing locally grown fruits and vegetables resulting in tremendous benefits 
for the local economy and producers.  

While HB2771 itself did not pass, there was a silver lining: the state budget (HB1800) included a $1.5M 
annual recurring allocation to support the DA BUX program. This funding provides an essential state match 
to the federal Gus Schumacher Nutrition Incentive Program (GusNIP) grant administered by The Food 
Basket Inc, Hawaiʻi Island's Food Bank, allowing for expansion into Foodland stores across the state. This 
funding will also support the continued seamless administration of this successful program, helping more 
families access healthy, locally sourced food. 

•  HB1775: At the heart of our legislative efforts this year was HB1775, the Universal Free School Meals bill. 

This initiative aimed to ensure that every public school student in Hawaiʻi had access to free school meals, 
regardless of their family's ability to pay. The rationale was simple yet powerful: hungry keiki can’t learn, 
and access to nutritious meals is fundamental to a child's ability to learn and thrive.  

Unfortunately, despite strong support from community advocates, students, teachers, and some legislators, 
HB1775 did not pass. This was a significant disappointment, as universal free school meals have proven 
benefits, including reducing stigma associated with free meals and improving overall student health and 
academic performance.  

• 

SB2135: Expanding SNAP eligibility was another important bill this session focused on increasing access to 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 19

 
 
FOOD EQUITY

public benefits. This bill aimed to establish a state funded SNAP program, making more families eligible for 
SNAP benefits, thereby reducing food insecurity and supporting those who might be just above the current 
200 percent income eligibility thresholds (about $64,000 for a family of 4 in 2024) but still struggling to 
afford basic necessities.  

Sadly, SB2135 did not make it through the legislative process due to a lack of information regarding cost 
and impact. This represents a missed opportunity to broaden the safety net and support more households 
in need. Despite this setback, legislators and local advocates seem very interested in continuing discussion 
around this type of program to better understand what it could look like, and how much it would cost.

Change Analysis

Hawaiʻi Appleseed’s policy brief on Universal Free 
School Meals, “Equity on the Menu,” released in 
January of 2024, highlighted the positive impacts 
of a nutrient-dense school breakfast and lunch. The 
brief has been recently updated into a fact sheet that 
summarizes these benefits, as well as an analysis of 
barriers to participation and the challenging impact on 
families, students, and teachers. The new resource also 
includes an updated cost analysis and opportunities for 
generating revenue to cover this critical service.

Key Findings:

•  Hawaiʻi still allows schools to deny meals to students 
who have a negative meal balance, making students 
not only hungry, but also ashamed. UFSM creates a 
more inclusive and supportive school environment. 

• 

Studies of UFSM in other states have shown a 
resulting, significant boost in test scores and 
improved academic performance.34 

•  UFSM supports ALICE (Asset Limited, Income 

Constrained, Employed) households in Hawaiʻi 
struggling to stretch their budgets. It makes sure that 
every child has access to nutritious meals regardless 
of ability to pay.

20 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

Cover image, “Equity on the Menu” // Hawaiʻi Appleseed

 
• 

For many students, school breakfast and lunch are the only full, balanced meals they receive a day. UFSM is 
a proven strategy to improve nutrition and food insecurity. 

•  UFSM supports Farm-to-School initiatives and local farmers by incorporating fresh, locally grown produce 

into school meals. This provides students with healthier, more sustainable food options. 

• 

The impact of hungry students is not limited to children and parents. Schools are bearing the financial 
impact as well. In fact, many teachers have reported using money from their own paychecks to keep a 
supply of snacks on hand for when students come to school hungry. 

Table 3. Key Hawaiʻi Appleseed Food Equity Communications Products, 2024 Legislative Session

Title

Type

Date Published

Universal Free School Meals ensures every keiki thrives

Blog Post

Feb. 20, 2024

Community participation during 2024 legislative session highlights pressing 
nature of food insecurity in Hawaiʻi

Blog Post

July 18, 2024

The Case for Universal Free School Meals

Fact Sheet

March, 2024

New report calls upon the state to join a growing national movement and 
provide free meals to all Hawaiʻi public school students

Press Release

Jan. 11, 2024

2024 Hawaiʻi Legislature Food Equity Policy Update #1

Video Update

Feb. 20, 2024

Hawaiʻi Appleseed recorded three earned media pieces related to the 2024 legislative session focused on food equity.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 21

FOOD EQUITY

On the community engagement front, Hawaiʻi Appleseed was deeply impressed with the Castle High School 
students who testified on Universal Free School Meals. Hunger in our schools is clearly an issue that resonates 
with its impacted population of students and their families. Hawaiʻi Public Health Institute’s Nate Hix, who 
spearheaded the organizing for bringing the students to the Capitol, was able to connect with a former 
colleague to bring the issue and the advocacy opportunity to the attention of the students, who then embraced 
the chance to share their stories. Finding ways to replicate this kind of success would be immensely helpful.

At the same time, Hawaiʻi Appleseed Community Engagement Specialist for Food Equity, Rein Terrado, 
continues to hold listening sessions and one-on-ones with community members to build community capacity to 
advocate for food equity policies going forward.

H A W A IʻI

HUNGER
ACTION

N E T W O R K

The Hawaiʻi Hunger Action Network functions as a statewide collaborative of grass-tops 
anti-hunger institutions and advocates working to ensure that Hawaiʻi’s food system 
reflects the needs of all of its communities. The mission of the network is to connect 
community with the policy-making process, and to take systems level action to ensure all 
people in Hawaiʻi have enough food to live healthy, dignified, productive lives. 

Sign up for affordable food equity-related action alerts from the coaliton here.

22 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

TRANSPORTATION 
EQUITY

Hawaiʻi has seen more than 20 pedestrian fatalities 
so far in 2024.35 While nearly all of the media 
coverage of these deadly collisions has focused on 
the actions of the pedestrians—noting if they were 
or were not in a marked crosswalk—little attention 
has been paid to traffic safety solutions.36 

This “victim-blaming” is in part due to jaywalking 
laws.37 Generally, jaywalking laws prohibit 
pedestrians from crossing a street outside of 
designated crosswalks or against traffic signals. 
Although jaywalking is foundational to the way 
many Americans understand roadway safety, it is a 
relatively young concept. 

Jaywalking laws were enacted in the 1920s 
following a lobbying campaign by the auto industry 
to shift the blame onto pedestrians for the national 
rise in traffic fatalities.38 Unfortunately, jaywalking 
laws have done little to prevent the nation’s 
growing traffic-related injuries and deaths.39 
Moreover,  jaywalking tickets have been found to 
disproportionately impact people of color.40 

Over the past few years, legislation to repeal 
or reform jaywalking laws has been enacted in 
Virginia, California, Nevada, Denver, and in Kansas 
City. About 51 million Americans now live in 
places where jaywalking has been decriminalized 
in some form.41 

Cover image, “Freedom to Walk” // Hawaiʻi Appleseed

In 2024, Hawaiʻi Appleseed’s newly-launched Transportation Equity initiative joined this national movement 
by advocating for a “Freedom to Walk” bill at the Hawaiʻi State Legislature. A primary challenge for the bill was 
that, throughout the legislative session, the state’s departments of transportation and law enforcement, as well 
as the county police departments, testified in staunch opposition. 

The opposition argued that repealing jaywalking laws would lead to adverse roadway safety impacts—claims 
that have been disproven by data collected in the localities where similar legislation has been recently passed 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 23

 
TRANSPORTATION EQUITY

(such as Virginia and California43). Ultimately, these opposing narratives are often driven by our society’s 
automobile-centric understanding of mobility and safety, and unfounded and irrational fears about crime. 
Nevertheless, these opposition arguments played a significant role in preventing the bill from being assigned 
conference committee appointments in the final stage of session. 

During the conference committee process, appointed legislators negotiate the final details of a bill to secure its 
passage. Despite support for the bill from community groups and agencies such as the Department of Health 
outweighing the opposition, and in spite of compromises already made as the bill navigated through multiple 
subject matter committees in both chambers, the Freedom to Walk bill ultimately did not make it past this 
critical stage. These challenges underscore the complexities of the legislative process, and the need for broad-
based education and support from the community within the advocacy process.

Priority Measures

SB2630/HB1623: The “Freedom to Walk” bill would have prevented pedestrians from being stopped by a law 
enforcement officer, fined, or subjected to any other penalty for jaywalking (unless there is an immediate 
danger of a collision with a moving vehicle).  

Hawaiʻi Appleseed also supported partner organization’s transportation policy priorities, such as efforts to 
increase the rebate for electric mobility devices (SB3021), and to impose rideshare fees to raise funds for the 
safe routes to school program (SB3022). 

Change Analysis

The legislative effort to pass a Freedom to Walk bill was strengthened by Hawaiʻi Appleseed research into 
jaywalking citation records. These records show that Hawaiʻi police, particularly in Honolulu, give out a much 
higher number of jaywalking-related citations compared to other localities in the U.S. This data was compiled 
into a “Freedom to Walk” policy report written by Hawaiʻi Appleseed Director of Transportation Equity, Abbey 
Seitz. The report summarizes the history of jaywalking laws, the negative impacts of jaywalking enforcement, 
and provides recommendations for future transportation investment. 

While the Freedom to Walk bill did not ultimately pass during the 2024 session, the bill did pass through its 
referred transportation and judiciary committees in both the House and Senate. This success was a testament 
to the diverse coalition of community partners that showed up at the four hearings to testify in support of the 
legislation, including the Hawaiʻi Public Health Institute, Hawaiʻi Bicycling League, the ACLU of Hawaiʻi, and 
the Grassroot Institute of Hawaiʻi, among others. This advocacy effort sparked important discussions on over-
policing, and on how to better allocate public resources to enhance pedestrian safety through roadway design 
and pedestrian infrastructure that will continue during the 2025 legislative session.

24 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

TRANSPORTATION EQUITY

b
e
e
3
2
/
/

i

S
t
o
c
k

Table 4. Key Hawaiʻi Appleseed Transportation Equity Communications Products, 2024 Legislative Session

Title

Type

Date Published

Decriminalize jaywalking in the 2024 legislative session

Blog Post

Jan. 24, 2024

Jaywalking remains illegal in Hawaiʻi; Freedom to Walk elevates transportation 
equity discussion

Blog Post

July 2, 2024

Want safer streets? Stop blaming pedestrians for traffic violence

Op-Ed

March 26, 2024

Repeal jaywalking laws to boost safety

Op-Ed

April. 24, 2024

Freedom to Walk: the high cost of jaywalking enforcement in Hawaiʻi

Press Release

March 6, 2024

Hawaiʻi Appleseed recorded seven earned media pieces related to the 2024 legislative session focused on transportation 
equity.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 25

 
 
ENDNOTES

Caron, Will, “Policy in Perspective 2022,” 
1. 
Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice, 
Nov. 2022, https://hiappleseed.org/publications/
policy-in-perspective-2022 

Kong, Ray, et al., “Eviction Prevention Through 

2. 
Hawaiʻi’s Tenant-Landlord Mediation Program,” 
Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice, 
Oct. 2022, https://hiappleseed.org/publications/
eviction-prevention-mediation-hawaii

Dayton, Kevin, “Lawmakers Give Final Approval 

9. 
To A ‘Historic’ Income Tax Cut In Long Day Of Voting,” 
Honolulu Civil Beat, May 2, 2024, https://www.
civilbeat.org/2024/05/lawmakers-give-final-approval-
to-a-historic-income-tax-cut-in-long-day-of-voting

Thomas, Devin, “Investing In Our Future: A Keiki 

10. 
Credit for Hawaiʻi,” Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center, 
Feb. 2023, p. 5, https://hiappleseed.org/publications/
investing-in-our-future-a-keiki-credit-for-hawaii 

Mizuo, Ashley, “Concerns rise for low-income 

3. 
families over Legislature’s recent tax cut measure,” 
Hawaiʻi Public Radio, May 14, 2024, https://www.
hawaiipublicradio.org/local-news/2024-05-14/
concerns-rise-for-low-income-families-over-
legislatures-recent-tax-cut-measure

Caron, Will, “The big budget trouble with 

4. 
HB2404’s over-broad and sweeping tax cuts,” Hawaiʻi 
Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice, May 29, 
2024, https://hiappleseed.org/blog/the-big-budget-
trouble-with-hb2404s-over-broad-and-sweeping-tax-cuts

Thomas, Devin, “Hawaiʻi’s elected leaders buy-

5. 
in to costly ‘trickle-down’ myth,” Hawaiʻi Appleseed 
Center for Law & Economic Justice, June 13, 2024, 
https://hiappleseed.org/blog/hawaii-elected-leaders-
buy-in-costly-trickle-down-myth

Giesting, Beth, “Recession in Review: Looking 

6. 
back at the Great Recession, 2007–09,” Hawaiʻi Budget 
& Policy Center, June 2019, https://hiappleseed.org/
publications/recession-in-review

7. 

Thomas, June 13, 2024

Smith, Jordan, “Equity on the Menu: The Case 

11. 
for Universal Free School Meals,” Hawaiʻi Appleseed 
Center for Law & Economic Justice, Jan. 2024, https://
hiappleseed.org/publications/equity-on-the-menu

12. 
White, Will, “Keeping Hawaiʻi Housed: 
Reducing the high costs of eviction through a 
combination of rent relief, eviction mediation 
and tenant protections,” Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy 
Center, March 2023, p. 8, https://hiappleseed.org/
publications/keeping-hawaii-housed

Carey, Isaac, “A Study of the Impact of Social 

13. 
Trust on Economic Growth and Defining a Potential
Threshold for ‘High Trust’ in Economic Research,” 
Skidmore College Economics Student Theses and 
Capstone Projects, May 5, 2024, p. 170,
https://creativematter.skidmore.edu/econ_studt_
schol/170

Giesting, Beth, “Hawaiʻi Budget Primer 2024-

14. 
25,” Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic 
Justice, Aug. 2024, https://hiappleseed.org/
publications/hawaii-budget-primer-2024-25

Spangler, Sam, “Preparations for ‘worst case 

8. 
scenario’ underway with Hawaii budget cuts,” KHON2, 
Feb. 27, 2024, https://www.khon2.com/local-news/
preparations-for-worst-case-scenario-underway-with-
hawaii-budget-cuts/ 

15. 
Jacoby, Samantha, “After Decades of Costly, 
Regressive, and Ineffective Tax Cuts, a New Course Is 
Needed,” Center on Budget & Policy Priorities, May 
17, 2023, https://www.cbpp.org/research/federal-tax/
after-decades-of-costly-regressive-and-ineffective-tax-
cuts-a-new-course-is

26 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

ENDNOTES

Thomas, Devin, “Hawaiʻi’s capital gains 

16. 
loophole floats the rich as working families struggle 
to stay above water,” Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for 
Law & Economic Justice, March 27, 2024, https://
hiappleseed.org/blog/hawaii-capital-gains-loophole-
floats-rich-working-families-struggle

Giesting, Beth, “A Public Investment:

25. 
Recommendations on handling Hawaiʻi’s public 
worker retirement commitments as the Baby 
Boomer generation prepares to enter retirement,” 
Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center, March 2019, https://
hiappleseed.org/publications/a-public-investment

Marr, Chuck, et al., “The 2017 Trump Tax Law 

17. 
Was Skewed to the Rich, Expensive, and Failed to 
Deliver on Its Promises,” Center on Budget & Policy 
Priorities, June 13, 2024, https://www.cbpp.org/
research/federal-tax/the-2017-trump-tax-law-was-
skewed-to-the-rich-expensive-and-failed-to-deliver

Giesting, Beth, “The Case for a New Economy:

26. 
40 Years of Rising Costs & Stagnant Wages,” Hawaiʻi 
Budget & Policy Center, Nov. 2020, p. 12, https://
hiappleseed.org/publications/new-economy

27. 

Ibid

18. 

Giesting, June 2019

19. 

Caron, May 29, 2024

20. 

Thomas, Feb. 2023, p. 5

Uechi, Colleen, “Deal will keep rent affordable 

28. 
at Front Street Apartments,” The Maui News, July 
15, 2022, https://www.mauinews.com/news/local-
news/2022/07/deal-will-keep-rent-affordable-at-front-
street-apartments  

21. 

Ibid

29. 

Kong, October 2022

Testimony on House Bill 1662 before 
22. 
committees of the Hawaiʻi State Legislature:

•  House Committee on Finance, Feb. 21, 2024, 
https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/sessions/
session2024/Testimony/HB1662_TESTIMONY_
FIN_02-21-24_.PDF 

• 

Senate Committee on Health & Human Services, 
March 18, 2024, https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/
sessions/session2024/Testimony/HB1662_HD1_
TESTIMONY_HHS_03-18-24_.PDF

Caron, Will, “What Finland can teach us about 
30. 
ending homelessness in Hawaiʻi,” Hawaiʻi Appleseed 
Center for Law & Economic Justice, Dec. 21, 2022, 
https://hiappleseed.org/blog/finland-teach-hawaii-
ending-homelessness

Smith, Jordan, “Community participation during 

31. 
2024 legislative session highlights pressing nature of 
food insecurity in Hawaiʻi,” Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center 
for Law & Economic Justice, July 18, 2024, https://
hiappleseed.org/blog/community-participation-2024-
legislative-session-food-insecurity-hawaii

Thomas, Devin, “Closing the Capital Gains 

23. 
Loophole,” Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center, Jan. 
2023, p. 5, https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/sessions/
session2024/Testimony/HB1662_HD1_TESTIMONY_
HHS_03-18-24_.PDF

 “The State of Food Insecurity in 

32. 
Hawaiʻi 2023,” Hawaiʻi Foodbank, July 
2024, https://d9x3r8n6.rocketcdn.me/wp-
content/uploads/2024/07/HawaiiFoodbank_
TheStateOfFoodInsecurityInHawaii_2023.pdf

Thomas, March 27, 2024: The estimated 

24. 
revenue collections from Hawaiʻi Appleseed’s 
proposed capital gains reform was based on income 
tax calcultions that predate the changes to the tax 
code made by Act 046 (2024). Estimates for capital 
gains revenue from a House Bill 1660 (2024)-style 
proposal under the newly implemented tax code 
would be significantly less than previously calculated.

33. 

Smith, Jan. 2024, p. 7

Schwartz, Amy Ellen and Michah Rothbart, “Let 

34. 
Them Eat Lunch: The Impact of Universal Free Meals 
on Student Performance,” Maxwell School Center for 
Policy Research, Working Paper Series No. 203, July 
2019, https://www.maxwell.syr.edu/docs/default-
source/research/cpr/working-papers/wp-203-let-

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 27

 
ENDNOTES

them-eat-lunch.pdf?sfvrsn=efae783d_8

37. 

Seitz, March 2024, p. 5

35. 
Gutierrez, Ben, “Experts: More steps ahead to 
curb rising pedestrian deaths in Hawaii,” Hawaii News 
Now, Sept. 25, 2024, https://www.hawaiinewsnow.
com/2024/09/26/transportation-experts-say-more-
steps-are-ahead-curb-rising-pedestrian-deaths 

Seitz, Abbey, “Freedom to Walk: 

36. 
Decriminalizing Jaywalking and Shifting Investment 
Towards Safe, Accessible Pedestrian Infrastructure,” 
Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic 
Justice, March 2024, p. 10, https://hiappleseed.org/
publications/freedom-to-walk

38. 

Ibid

39. 

Seitz, March 2024, p. 12

40. 

Ibid

41. 

Seitz, March 2024, p. 15

42. 

Ibid

28 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE