Title: Beyond the Ticket
Date: unknown
URL: https://hiappleseed.org/publications/beyond-the-ticket
PDF: https://hiappleseed.org/s/Beyond-The-Ticket_FINAL.pdf
============================================================

March 2025 

BEYOND THE TICKET

Recommendations for a More Equitable Traffic 
Enforcement System

H AWA IʻI   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

www.hiappleseed.org

Authors: Abbey Seitz and Trinity Gilliam
Cover Image: Jess Vide

Hawaiʻi Appleseed is committed to a more socially and economically just Hawaiʻi, where everyone has genuine 
opportunities to achieve economic security and fulfill their potential. We change systems to address inequity 
and foster greater opportunity by conducting data analysis and research to address income inequality, educating 
policymakers and the public, engaging in collaborative problem solving and coalition building, and advocating 
for policy and systems change.

The work of Hawaiʻi Appleseed is about people. The issues we work on—housing, food, wages, mobility, the state 
budget and taxation, and racial and indigenous equity—are important because they ensure people have access 
to shelter, sustenance, and the means to survive and thrive individually and collectively. Addressing these issues 
requires the knowledge and expertise of the people that have first-hand experience and live with the adverse 
consequences of our flawed systems.

This report was completed with support from the Microsoft Justice Reform Initiative.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Glossary of Terms

Executive Summary

Impacts of Traffic Enforcement

•  Lessons from Impacted Individuals

•  Funding Traffic Enforcement

Minor Traffic Violations in Hawaiʻi

•  Hawaiʻi’s Unequal Enforcement of Jaywalking Laws

Recommendations 

Endnotes

3

4 

5

9

10

11

13

14

18

Copyright © 2025 Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice. All rights reserved. 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1180, Honolulu, HI 96813

2 • BEYOND THE TICKET

GLOSSARY OF TERMS

Traffic citation, also colloquially known as a traffic 
ticket, describes the legal document issued by law 
enforcement to a driver for violating traffic laws. 
Citations typically require the recipient to either pay a 
fine, appear in court, or take other specified actions, 
depending on the violation.

Traffic fines and fees describe money-owed for traffic 
citations. While these terms are often lumped together, 
they do have slightly different meanings. Traffic fines 
are monetary penalties imposed for violations of 
traffic laws, while fees are charges that are assessed 
for services related to traffic offenses, such as court 
costs. The key difference is that fines are punitive in 
nature, where fees are typically administrative charges 
associated with handling the violation.

Traffic crime describes serious violations of traffic 
laws that may result in criminal charges, such 
as driving under the influence (DUI) or vehicular 
manslaughter. These offenses often carry more severe 
penalties, such as incarceration, compared to traffic 
infractions. 

Traffic infraction describes a minor violation of traffic 
laws that is typically punishable by a fine rather than 
criminal penalties. 

Traffic violation describes any breach of laws or 
regulations governing vehicle operation on public 
roads. Violations can range from minor infractions 
to serious crimes and may lead to fines, points on a 
driver’s record, or legal repercussions.

Minor or non-serious traffic infractions describe a 
traffic violation that does not impose public safety 
risks, such as a dead taillight or failing to signal. These 
citations usually result in fines but do not typically 
carry criminal charges. 

Criminal-legal system describes the framework 
of laws, institutions, and processes established to 
maintain and enforce laws. It includes law enforcement 
agencies, courts, and correctional facilities. 
Increasingly this term is being used in place of the 
“criminal justice system”, recognizing that instead 
of advancing justice, our current system has harmed 
many communities.

BEYOND THE TICKET • 3

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

EACH DAY in the United States, an estimated 50,000 
Americans are pulled over by the police while driving, 
making traffic stops the single most common way that 
people interact with the criminal-legal system.1 It’s not 
just drivers. While there is far less data on interactions 
between police and other, non-driving roadway users, 
we know that pedestrians and bicyclists also interact 
with police in most cities. 

Our current system of traffic enforcement gives out 
harsh penalties for offenses that pose little risk to the 
public. In this report, Hawaiʻi Appleseed refers to these 
offenses as “minor” or “non-serious” infractions. The 
focus on these minor offenses means less attention 
and resources are given to shifts in street design, which 
do a far better job of improving roadway safety and 
advancing transportation equity. 

Roadway safety advocates have long championed 
police enforcement as a tool to hold dangerous drivers 
accountable. However, there is growing recognition 
that this approach is ineffective at improving roadway 
safety. It can also lead to cycles of debt, damaging 
court records and, in some cases, violent interactions 
with police, arrests and incarceration. National data 
shows that communities of color bear the brunt of 
these impacts, particularly violent policing.2 

This report examines the negative impacts of traffic 
enforcement, the prevalence of minor traffic violations 
in Hawaiʻi, and how traffic enforcement is funded. The 
report includes recommendations for a more equitable 
approach to traffic enforcement, including: 

•  Requiring the police to collect demographic data 

for all stops, not just arrests;  

• 

Eliminating unnecessary enforcement of 
pedestrians and bicyclists; 

•  Reclassifying certain minor traffic infractions as 
“secondary violations” that cannot be used as 
pretextual stops;

4 • BEYOND THE TICKET

• 

Automatically sealing traffic infraction records 
when cases are closed;   

•  Creating a fines/fees system that is income-based 

instead of relying on flat fees; and  

• 

Exploring the establishment of non-police first 
responder teams whose mission is traffic and road 
safety, not criminal law enforcement. 

To inform this policy report, the team relied upon 
three key research methodologies: review of existing 
literature and studies; review of traffic citations in 
Hawaiʻi; and interviews with individuals who have 
received traffic citations in Hawaiʻi. 

An interactive story map complements the report, 
showcasing the unequal enforcement of jaywalking 
laws and the stories of those impacted by traffic 
enforcement. The storymap is publicly accessible and 
is available at hiappleseed.org/shifting-focus-safe-
roads-not-tickets. 

IMPACTS OF TRAFFIC 
ENFORCEMENT

Driving can have serious consequences for people both inside and outside of vehicles. According to the U.S. 
Department of Transportation, there were more than 42,000 traffic fatalities in the United States in 2022.3 As 
such, all drivers hold an immense responsibility, and serious traffic offenses that have the possibility of causing 
harm—such as speeding and intoxicated driving—warrant some level of enforcement.

However, equitable traffic enforcement requires a clear distinction to be made between serious violations, and 
minor, or non-serious infractions. When used in the report, these terms mean traffic infractions that pose little to 
no threat to public safety. Examples include failing to renew a vehicle registration or crossing the road without 
using a crosswalk. While technically infractions, these behaviors do not significantly endanger other road users. 

In some cases, minor traffic infractions carry heavier penalties than serious traffic violations, and can further 
entrench individuals within cycles of poverty and criminalization. The disconnect between certain traffic laws and 
public safety is exemplified in a statement made by Randy Petersen, a former police officer in Texas, who stated: 

“During my 21 years as a police officer ... I never found an air freshener dangling from a rearview mirror to be 
the cause of highway carnage ... much of the traffic code criminalizes things that do not contribute much to 
roadway safety, which is almost universally the reason given for their enforcement.” 4

Figure 1. How Traffic Stops Can Lead to Cycles of Poverty

Incarceration 
+ Probation

Driving With 
No License

Fines

Debt

License
Stoppers

Trafﬁc
Stop

Court 
Records

Limited 
Economic, Housing 
Opportunities

Figure 1: Traffic stops can 
catalyze a web of negative 
impacts that affect individuals’ 
social and economic wellbeing. 
While traffic fines and court 
records are the most common 
outcomes of traffic enforcement, 
for some, routine traffic stops 
can also lead to suspended 
licenses, probation, and even 
incarceration. These outcomes 
are often interdependent, and 
can lead to further cycles of 
criminalization.

BEYOND THE TICKET • 5

Police Interactions, Pretextual Stops, and Violence

At a minimum, most people experience some form of stress as a result of traffic stops. We heard this countless 
times during our interviews. For example, one interviewee described feeling “vulnerable and powerless” when 
stopped by a police officer for riding a bike on a sidewalk.

However, in some cases, a minor traffic violation can be used by police as an opportunity to investigate more 
serious crimes, such as possession of drugs. This is referred to as a ‘pretextual’ stop. Police often reason that 
pretextual stops are needed to root out more dangerous crime, however, according to one study only 1 percent of 
traffic stops yield a search where contraband is found.5 

Implicit biases can play a large role in pretextual stops. For example, according to one study, Black drivers are 
searched about 1.5 to 2 times as often as white drivers, while they are less likely to be carrying drugs, guns, or 
other illegal contraband, compared to their white peers.6

The consequences of pretextual stops can be profound leading, in some cases, to fines, searches and arrests. 
Moreover, when minor traffic stops lead to more serious situations with police officers, individuals are prone 
to become defensive or anxious. This behavior can be misinterpreted by officers and in some cases, this can 
escalate into confrontations.  

While there are few local examples of pretextual traffic stops turning violent, there are countless national 
examples of high-profile incidents that demonstrate how routine traffic stops can also result in physical 
altercations or, in extreme cases, fatalities. These national incidents also shed light to the fact that communities 
of color have disproportionately borne the brunt of such violence. 

One prominent example includes Philando Castile who was shot and killed by police in St. Paul in 2016 after 
being pulled over for a broken taillight.7 This was one of the many interactions that Philando Castile had with 
the police. In the 13 years prior to the shooting, Castile had been stopped by police 49 times for minor traffic 
infractions, most of which were dismissed.8

Tragically, Castile is one of many who have been killed during traffic stops. Nationally, between 2017 and 2021, 
an estimated 400 drivers and passengers—none of whom were stopped for a violent crime and none of whom 
were armed—were killed by police. Black individuals make up a disproportionate number of the unarmed drivers 
killed by police.9

6 • BEYOND THE TICKET

ENFORCEMENT IMPACTS

Court Records

Because traffic citations are filed by the state court in Hawaiʻi, an individual’s citations record is available 
publicly online via eCourt Kokua.10 Even if the traffic ticket is paid, the citation remains public information unless 
the defendant makes a request to the court to expunge and/or seal the record. Since most minor and non-
serious traffic infractions are considered civil cases, they cannot be expunged from a person’s public record, as 
expungement can only occur for criminal cases. Examples of criminal traffic misdemeanors include intoxicated 
driving, reckless driving, and driving without a license. 

Traffic cases are expunged and/or sealed in Hawaiʻi on a case-by-case basis. Based on information provided 
on the Hawaiʻi Court Records website, requests to seal or expunge traffic cases are typically only granted if the 
case was acquitted, the charges were dismissed, or the conviction was overturned.11 The length of time that 
traffic citations stay on a person’s record vary state by state. Some states allow drivers to attend traffic school in 
exchange for having violations removed from their driving record.

The evergreen nature of traffic court records can have negative implications as sometimes eCourt Kokua is used 
by employers and landlords to conduct background checks on prospective applicants. This can also impact a 
person’s ability to receive affordable car insurance. Many individuals interviewed for this report shared that they 
had paid their traffic citations, primarily so that they would not show up on their record, believing the citations 
would be removed from the public record once the citation had been paid. 

Fines and Debt

Unpaid tickets are typically sent to debt collectors, which can lead to damage to an individual’s credit score. 
Debt collectors can also add collection fees and interest to the original ticket amount, which can make it even 
more challenging to pay the ticket off. If left unpaid, debt can lead to legal consequences (such as potential court 
appearances and wage garnishment), difficulty in obtaining government services (such as vehicle registration), 
as well as negative impacts to employment and housing opportunities, as some employers and landlords 
conduct credit checks as part of the application process.

Traffic fines can exacerbate economic hardship, pushing families deeper into debt and making it more difficult 
for them to meet basic needs. For example, a 2018 Alabama Appleseed report found that 38 percent of people 
with fines for violations such as low-level vehicle infractions and non-payment of exorbitant court fees ended up 
committing more serious crimes, such as selling drugs, illegal sex work, or robbery, to raise the needed money.12 
This reflects a troubling cycle where minor infractions can escalate into more serious criminal behavior, driven 
by financial desperation.

License Stoppers

When a person does not pay their traffic ticket, a “stopper” can be put on a person’s driving or car record, 
which stops the person from obtaining or renewing their license or car registration.13 In 2020, the American Civil 
Liberties Union (ACLU) estimated that a staggering 38 percent of Hawaiʻi drivers (358, 067 people) had a stopper 
on their license or car registration. According to The Washington Post, compared to other states, in 2017 Hawaiʻi 
had among the highest percentage of its over 18 population with suspended license for debt or related reasons.14 

Removing a person’s ability to drive imposes mobility barriers, making it more difficult to access basic services, and 
travel to school or work. This is particularly true in Hawaiʻi, where an estimated 67 percent of workers commute by 
driving alone.15 Given the economic importance of driving to many residents, some people with license stoppers 
choose to continue to drive, availing themselves to further criminal penalties for driving without a license. 

BEYOND THE TICKET • 7

ENFORCEMENT IMPACTS

i

S
t
o
c
k

In 2020, the ACLU advocated for reform to Hawaiʻi’s laws regarding license stoppers, resulting in the passage 
of Act 59 (2020).16 Under this law, any traffic citation issued from November, 2020 onward does not generate 
license stoppers. However, the fines for these traffic citations can still be sent to collection agencies if not paid, 
and the citation fines still remain on a person’s record. 

Those who had license stoppers from traffic infraction that occurred prior to November 2020 may request for 
the court to lift their stopper. Notably, this reform only applies to civil traffic citations. License stoppers can 
still be applied when fees for criminal traffic misdemeanors go unpaid. This includes driving without a license, 
which in many cases occurs due to the presence of a license stopper.

Probation and Incarceration 

According to the Prison Policy Institute, as of 2023 there were nearly 24,000 Hawaiʻi residents incarcerated or 
under community supervision as of 2023.17 Moreover, an estimated 15,000 different people are admitted to 
Hawaiʻi’s jails each year.18 The state’s combined jail and prison population has increased by 670 percent over the 
last four decades.19 Hawaiʻi, along with the rest of the United States, locks up a higher percentage of its residents 
than almost any other democratic country on Earth.20 

While national data indicates that a small percentage of the incarcerated population were arrested solely for 
traffic crimes, it is unclear how prevalent pretextual traffic stops are in sending individuals to jail and prison.

8 • BEYOND THE TICKET

ENFORCEMENT IMPACTS

Lessons from Impacted Individuals

To better understand the negative impacts caused by traffic enforcement, we interviewed people who have 
received citations for jaywalking and other minor traffic infractions. 

Key Takeaways from Interviews 

• 

A majority of interviewees were immigrants and/or transplants to Hawaiʻi, and many were not aware of 
Hawaiʻi’s unique traffic laws, particularly laws pertaining to pedestrians and bicyclists.  

•  Many interviewees were filled with a deep sense of shame and guilt about being cited. 

•  Over half of interviewees dealt with financial hardship due to citation fees. 

• 

A recurring emotion interviewees felt during police encounters was fear and anxiety of possible escalation. 

•  Most interviewees said they paid their traffic ticket out of fear of it tarnishing their legal record, though most 

did not know that traffic tickets remain on the record even after being paid.  

• 

Interviewees wished for more awareness of local traffic laws and that there were less severe consequences 
for minor traffic infractions. 

Common Stories We Heard 

Jaywalking to Save Time: 

Mark was running late for a meeting and the pedestrian crossing signal was taking too 
long to change, so he decided to cross the street during the “Don’t Walk” signal to save 
time. However, an officer stopped him and issued a citation for jaywalking. Mark was 
aware of the law but didn't think the laws were strictly enforced, especially since he was 
not interfering with traffic. He felt anxious, confused, and defensive during the police 
encounter. He also felt disappointed with himself for not being more careful. 

After receiving the ticket, Mark decided to pay the fine online to avoid the hassle of going 
to court. He also didn’t want the ticket to hinder his traffic record, though he didn’t know 
that the citation would remain on his record, even after it was paid. The ticket was an extra 
challenge for Mark, forcing him to rearrange his budget to accommodate the fine. 

Forgetting To Renew a Vehicle Registration: 

Jenny was on her way to work when she was pulled over by the police. After Jenny 
provided her license, registration, and insurance, the police officer found that her vehicle 
registration was three months expired. Busy with work and taking care of her children, 
Jenny had forgotten to renew her vehicle registration. She was ashamed and confused 
about what she needed to do, and had to speak to another officer for guidance. Jenny 
completed the necessary tasks to renew her registration, but it took her nearly a month. 
She was left with a financial hardship that negatively impacted her family. 

BEYOND THE TICKET • 9

Funding Traffic Enforcement

Traffic enforcement is primarily funded through county general funds, which includes revenue from property 
taxes, local government taxes, and state funding allocations. Additional resources are provided by federal 
grants. A key distributor of this federal funding is the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). 
To receive these funds, the Hawaiʻi Department of Transportation (HDOT) must submit an annual highway safety 
plan outlining efforts to reduce traffic fatalities through education and police enforcement, as well as an annual 
report summarizing the outcomes of its efforts. 

While the NHTSA funds generally support enforcement of more serious traffic crimes, such as speeding and 
driving under the influence (DUI), in Hawaiʻi these funds are also provided to the Honolulu Police Department 
(HPD) to carry out overtime enforcement of pedestrian and bicycle violations. For example, in federal fiscal year 
(FFY) 2020, HPD documented 6,905 pedestrian and bicycle citations, 2,258 of which were grant-funded.21 

Use of these federal funds has come under recent scrutiny. In 2024, the ACLU of Hawaiʻi filed a lawsuit against HPD 
claiming that the agency had used DUI check points to carry out unlawful arrests, as a means to justify receipt of 
federal grant money.22 In a letter to HPD, the ACLU Hawaiʻi documents that in 2022 and 2023 there were at least 70 
individuals who blew 0.000 and were still arrested for DUI by HPD officers.23 

At a national-level, advocates are calling on the U.S. Department of Transportation to hold police agencies 
accountable to performing effective and equitable enforcement. To achieve this, the Center for American 
Progress notes that it is important for data collection and performance metrics to move beyond just the number 
of traffic stops and citations, and also include demographics of individuals stopped by police, and incident-level 
characteristics of traffic stops.24 

10 • BEYOND THE TICKET

MINOR TRAFFIC 
VIOLATIONS IN HAWAIʻI

Traffic laws vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. In Hawaiʻi, the state traffic code provides a baseline of traffic 
laws that all roadway users must follow. County governments can impose additional traffic regulations. Notably, 
while county governments generally do not have the authority to create regulations that contradict with the state 
traffic code, the level to which certain traffic laws are enforced can differ greatly between counties. 

The following discussion of traffic violations in Hawaiʻi only includes examples of minor violations found in the 
state traffic code. It is not comprehensive of all minor traffic infractions, and does not include county-specific 
regulations. While the minor vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle-related violations discussed in the following 
section differ greatly in description and penalties, the common thread they share is that they pose minimal 
impact to public safety. 

While we do not know the full extent to which these minor traffic violations are enforced in Hawaiʻi, according 
to one national study, more than 46 percent of traffic stops in the U.S. are for minor technical violations.25 

BEYOND THE TICKET • 11

MINOR VIOLATIONS

Minor Vehicle Violations

The majority of non-serious driving infractions in Hawaiʻi relate to vehicle operation, maintenance and 
compliance. For example, the operation of a vehicle or moped without a certificate of inspection (HRS§286-25) 
can result in a fine of up to $100. Individuals with noisy or altered motorcycle/moped mufflers can receive similar 
penalties. Steeper penalties can occur for driving with tinted windows (HRS§291-21.5), and playing music too 
loudly (HRS§342F-9).  

Penalties increase exponentially when vehicle registration or licensing is involved. While most minor traffic 
violations discussed in this report are categorized as civil traffic violations in Hawaiʻi, the act of driving without a 
license can carry criminal penalties. 

Hawaiʻi has among the strictest laws in the nation for driving without a license, which for a first-time offense 
can include up to 30 days in jail and/or a fine up to $1,000.26 Penalties were also recently increased for multiple 
offenses. Under Act 212 (2024), driving without a valid license can now result in a Class C felony, if the offenses 
occurred within 5 years of each other.27 

Hawaiʻi law does not currently distinguish between individuals driving with an expired license (i.e., those who 
have previously passed driving licensure but have not properly renewed their license) and individuals who have 
no previous driving training and/or licensure. This report recognizes the latter as a serious traffic offense, but the 
former as a minor offense. This is based on the understanding that some individuals cannot renew their license 
due to traffic fines and fees, or in some cases, forget to renew their license on time. 

Pedestrian Violations

There are numerous violations in Hawaiʻi that can penalize pedestrians for how, when, and where they cross the 
road. Generally these are referred to as jaywalking laws. 

Jaywalking is typically understood as the act of crossing the street outside of a crosswalk or against the don’t-
walk sign. However, in Hawaiʻi, jaywalking laws include a confusing set of violations such as crossing the street 
on the count-down timer (HRS§291C-33), disobeying the instructions of a traffic-control device (HRS§291C-71), 
and not using the right half of crosswalks (HRS§291C-75). 

As discussed in Hawaiʻi Appleseed’s 2024 “Freedom to Walk” report, law enforcement in Hawaiʻi is heavy-handed 
toward jaywalking. For example, from 2018 to 2023, there were over 5,000 jaywalking tickets given per year on 
average (not including tickets given to juveniles).28 In comparison, data shows that 9,833 jaywalking citations 
were issued across Washington state from 2000 to 2023, which averages about 428 citations per year.29 This 
means that only six jaywalking citations are given for every 100,000 people in Washington state. Comparatively, a 
staggering 349 jaywalking citations are given for every 100,000 people in Hawaiʻi.

Bicycle Violations

Similar to pedestrians, bicyclists can also be penalized for how they navigate the roadway. For example, 
bicyclists can be fined for riding on the sidewalks in business districts (HRS§291C-148(b)) or improperly riding 
using roadways and bikeways (HRS291C-145). 

Additionally, bicyclists can be penalized for missing a bicycle lamp and other equipment (HRS§291C-147), having 
an unregistered bicycle (HRS§249-14), and defacing a bicycle’s serial number (HRS§293-1).

12 • BEYOND THE TICKET

MINOR VIOLATIONS

Hawaiʻi’s Unequal Enforcement of Jaywalking Laws 

Hawaiʻi Appleseed recently mapped the location of jaywalking citations given in Hawaiʻi (2018 to 2023). We found 
that nearly all tickets (over 99 percent) were given out by HPD on the island of Oʻahu. 

Generally speaking, jaywalking tickets given on Oʻahu were concentrated in densely populated, low-income 
areas. For example, the top five zip codes in Hawaiʻi with the highest per capita number of jaywalking tickets are 
96814 (Waikīkī-Ala Moana), 96815 (Kapahulu-Diamond Head), 96817 (Kalihi-Palama), 96813 (Nuʻuanu-Downtown-
Chinatown), and 96826 (McCully-Mōʻiliʻili).

As shown in Figure 2, all of these zipcode areas have a higher percentage of Asset Limited, Income Constrained, 
Employed Households (ALICE) households, when compared to the Oʻahu average of 31 percent.30 ALICE 
households earn above the federal poverty level yet still face challenges in meeting their basic needs. 

To view the map of jaywalking citations and learn more about who is most impacted by jaywalking citations, visit 
hiappleseed.org/shifting-focus-safe-roads-not-tickets. 

Figure 2. Economic Characteristics of the Top Five Jaywalking Zipcodes in Hawaiʻi (2018 to 2023)31

.

%
5
9
7
% 4
3
5
6
3

.

%
9
2
7
5

.

%
9
6
6
3

.

%
8
8
2
5

.

%
5
9
7
3

.

%
0
5
5
1

.

%
1
0
6

.

%
5
1
.
9

96817
Kalihi-Pālama

96815
Kapahulu-
Diamond Head

% of Households 
Below the 
Federal Poverty 
Threshold 
Oʻahu: 10%

96813
Nuʻuanu-
Downtown- 
Chinatown

% of ALICE 
Households 
Oʻahu: 31%

.

%
6
4
7
% 4
6
6
7
3

.

%
4
5
3
4

.

%
3
4
8
3

.

%
2
0
8
1

.

%
7
8
4
1

.

96826
McCully-
Mōʻiliʻili

96814
Waikīkī-
Ala Moana

% of Households Above ALICE Threshold

% of ALICE Households

% of Households Below the Federal 
Poverty Threshold

BEYOND THE TICKET • 13

 
RECOMMENDATIONS

Over-policing of minor traffic infractions has entrapped many people in cycles of poverty and criminalization. To 
address these social and economic issues, Hawaiʻi Appleseed has provided six policy recommendations to create 
a more equitable approach to roadway enforcement. These recommendations are also summarized in Figure 3. 

While traffic safety strategies should focus on investing in safe roadway infrastructure and public transit systems, 
the recommendations in this report focus on changes to the criminal-legal system. For each recommendation, an 
example of where the policy has been implemented is also provided. 

As shown in Figure 3, some of the recommendations are low-hanging fruit which should be implemented now, 
while others are more transformative, and will require additional time and resources to implement. 

Figure 3. Recommendations for a More Equitable Approach to Traffic Enforcement

Now

Future

1.

Require police 
to collect 
demographic 
data for all 
trafﬁc stops.

2.

Eliminate
unnecessary
pedestrian and 
bicycle 
enforcement.

3.

Reclassify 
minor trafﬁc 
violations as 
secondary 
violations.

14 • BEYOND THE TICKET

4.

Automatically 
seal trafﬁc 
infractions 
when cases are 
closed.

5.

Build 
unarmed 
trafﬁc 
enforcement 
teams.

6.

Create an 
income-based 
trafﬁc ﬁnes 
system.

Financial resources diverted from trafﬁc enforcement should be 
invested in safe roadway infrastructure and public transit systems.

1. Require Police to Collect Demographic Data

Data collection is an essential tool to understand who is being most impacted by traffic enforcement and to 
combat racial biases in policing. Both at the federal and state level, current data collection of traffic enforcement 
is focused on the number of traffic stops and citations collected. However, this information is limited and does 
not demonstrate whether the enforcement is effective or equitable.32 

Hawaiʻi Appleseed recommends expanded data collection for all traffic stops, including documentation of the 
demographic characteristics of the individual being stopped by the police. At a minimum, this should include the 
person’s self-reported racial and gender identity, as well as their age.

Police Transparency in Washington, D.C.: In 2016, the Council of the District of Columbia passed the 
Neighborhood Engagement Achieves Results Act, which requires Washington, D.C.’s Metropolitan Police 
Department (MPD) to keep extensive records for every stop its officers conduct.33 Notably, for over 3 years, 
the MPD refused to implement this statute until a court ordered compliance as a result of a lawsuit.34 

The ACLU of Washington, D.C. analyzed police stop data in both 2019 and 2020. In both years the MPD 
disproportionately stopped and searched Black people. For example, in 2020 nearly 75 percent of all 
people stopped by the MPD were Black, while Black people only make up 46 percent of D.C.’s population.35 

According to the National Conference of State Legislators, as of 2021, at least 23 states and D.C. have laws 
regarding the collection of data when an individual is stopped by law enforcement.36

2. Eliminate Unnecessary Pedestrian and Bicycle Enforcement

In Hawaiʻi, pedestrian and bicycle enforcement has not been successful in reducing traffic deaths and injuries, 
and it is clear that business-as-usual will not create safer streets. 

Hawaiʻi Appleseed recommends eliminating unnecessary pedestrian and bicycle enforcement by amending 
HRS§291C to state that pedestrians and bicyclists shall not be stopped by a law enforcement officer, fined, or 
subjected to any other penalty, for acting contrary to the traffic code, so long as they do not pose a threat of a 
collision with another roadway user.

Decriminalizing Jaywalking in California: In 2022, California became the largest state in the nation to 
decriminalize jaywalking. Taking effect on January 1, 2023, the Freedom to Walk Act (AB 2147) prohibits 
pedestrians from being stopped or fined for crossing outside of marked crosswalks, or against a traffic 
signal, so long as there is no “immediate danger of a collision with a moving vehicle.”37 

Although some lawmakers and advocates feared decriminalizing jaywalking would lead to a public safety 
crisis, that has not come to fruition. While no control study has been conducted, when compared to 
2022, there have actually been fewer traffic fatalities in the first 2 years following implementation of the 
measure.38 This effort has also reduced the fines and fees faced by pedestrians. 

Prior to the Freedom to Walk Act, pedestrians in California could be fined up to $250 for jaywalking.39 As 
of late 2024, about 60 million Americans now live in places where jaywalking has been decriminalized in 
some form, with New York City the latest to join the list in October, 2024.40

BEYOND THE TICKET • 15

RECOMMENDATIONS

3. Reclassify Minor Traffic Violations as Secondary Violations

Enforcement of minor traffic violations can be used as pretextual stops and searches for more serious crimes. At 
a minimum, these stops cause fear and anxiety. In some cases, they can also lead to violent confrontations with 
severe legal consequences. Hawaiʻi Appleseed recommends that the state explore reclassifying certain minor 
traffic violations as secondary violations. Citations for secondary violations can still be given, however they 
cannot be the sole reason that a person is stopped by the police. 

As an example, if having an expired vehicle registration was reclassified as a secondary violation, police officers 
could not stop an individual solely for that reason. However, if an individual was stopped for another reason—
such as speeding or running a red light—and then was found to also have an expired vehicle registration, then 
they could also be cited for that infraction (in addition to the original violation which the individual was stopped 
for). The collection and reporting of traffic stop data is an important next step to identify which traffic violations 
should be reclassified.

Philadelphia’s Driving Equality Bill: Under the Driving Equality bill, effective since March 2022, 
Philadelphia reclassified eight motor vehicle violations—such as late vehicle registration, missing a single 
headlight or taillight, and minor bumper damage—as secondary violations. 

The measure was developed in response to persistent racial disparities in Philadelphia’s traffic 
enforcement.41 For example, from October 2018 to September 2019, an estimated 72 percent of people 
stopped by Philadelphia police in traffic stops were Black, although they comprise only 43 percent of 
the city’s population.42 In the year following the implementation of the Driving Equality bill, traffic stops 
decreased by 6.8 percent.43 Moreover, during this time period, the proportion of traffic stops made along 
the city’s high injury network increased by 12.3 percent.44 According to the Defender Association of 
Philadelphia, the Driving Equality bill has had no demonstrable negative effect on public safety.45

4. Automatically Seal Traffic Infractions when Cases are Closed

Even after tickets are paid, traffic violations remain on an individual’s public legal record and can pose 
challenges to accessing future insurance, employment, or housing opportunities. Currently, only traffic 
infractions that carry criminal penalties can be expunged and sealed from a person’s record. Hawaiʻi Appleseed 
recommends that the state should automatically seal certain traffic violations. This could be explored as part of 
Hawaiʻi’s Clean Slate Expungement Task Force (enacted via Act 241 in 2024), which is charged with developing a 
state program to proactively expunge certain records of qualified individuals.46 

California’s Clean Slate Laws: Since 2022, the California Department of Justice has been required on 
a monthly basis to review the statewide criminal justice databases and identify persons eligible for 
automatic conviction record relief.47 Eligible individuals include those who were sentenced to probation, 
and completed it without revocation, and those convicted of an infraction or a misdemeanor, including 
traffic infractions. 

Following the passage of Senate Bill 731, which took effect in July 2023, California now automatically seals 
all non-serious, non-violent, and non-sexual felony convictions.48 Generally, convictions are sealed after 4 
years have elapsed since a completed probation or sentence.49 This landmark legislation aimed to alleviate 
the burdens that individuals with criminal-legal records face, and has provided inspiration for similar 
clean slate efforts in Hawaiʻi and elsewhere.

16 • BEYOND THE TICKET

RECOMMENDATIONS

5. Build Unarmed Traffic Enforcement Teams

The presence of law enforcement can create stressful, hostile environments, and in some rare cases, can escalate 
into violent encounters. The enforcement of most traffic violations, particularly minor traffic violations, does not 
require armed police. Hawaiʻi Appleseed recommends that local law enforcement agencies build unarmed teams 
to carry out enforcement of minor traffic violations.

Berkley to De-Cop its Traffic Enforcement: Berkeley, California, is poised to become the first city 
in the U.S. to replace police officers with unarmed employees to carry out a majority of its traffic 
enforcement.50 The proposal, approved in 2020, sought to create a separate department for unarmed 
public works officials to carry out traffic enforcement.51 

While the Berkeley City Council approved a budget in 2022 that would include funding for the department, 
it has yet to be implemented. According to the Stanford Center for Racial Justice, police opposition is a 
major reason for slow implementation.52

6. Create an Income-Based Traffic Fines System

The current system of flat fees for traffic violations disproportionately burdens low-income individuals, 
worsening existing inequalities and perpetuating cycles of poverty. A single traffic ticket can impose significant 
financial strain on those who are already struggling to make ends meet, often leading to a cascade of missed 
payments and debt. Notably, while most criminal legal fees in Hawaiʻi offer an “ability to pay” option, it remains 
at the judge’s discretion whether to grant it or not. It is also unclear how often this option is implemented. 

Hawaiʻi Appleseed recommends exploring the implementation of a traffic fines and fees system based on 
income, instead of using flat fees. This means that wealthier individuals pay more for the same violation than 
those with lower incomes. This not only ensures that penalties are equitable, but also maintains compliance by 
making fines manageable for all.

Finland’s Day Fines System: In Finland, like other Scandinavian and European countries, fines for traffic 
violations are based on an individual’s daily income, as well as the severity of the violation. This system, 
known as a “day fines” system, was first created in Finland in the 1920s. When issuing traffic tickets, police 
have access to a central taxpayer database to determine the person’s daily income.53 

While Finland has made national headlines for its wealthy elites racking up exorbitantly high fines, these 
instances are rare. Over the last century, the day fines system has been effective in deterring traffic 
violations without burdening lower-income drivers. 

Based on 2021 data from the World Health Organization, Finland has one of the lowest road fatality rates 
in the world, with only 4.2 annual traffic deaths per 1,000 people.54 Comparatively, there are 14.1 annual 
traffic deaths per 1,000 people in the United States.55 

Further research is needed to understand the potential constitutional challenges of instituting a similar 
day fines system in the United States, arising primarily from the Excessive Fines Clause of the Eighth 
Amendment of the Constitution. However, recent research from the University of Chicago Law Review 
indicates that these obstacles are “navigable,” particularly if limits are imposed on how high fines can be.56 

BEYOND THE TICKET • 17

ENDNOTES

Ghandnoosh, Nazgol and Celeste Barry, “One in 
1. 
Five: Disparities in Crime and Policing,” The Sentencing 
Project, November 2, 2023. https://openpolicing.
stanford.edu/findings/#:~:text=Police%20pull%20
over%20more%20than,not%20in%20any%20
systematic%20way.

2. 
Preston, Allie, “Safe Streets for All: An 
Opportunity To Rethink Traffic Enforcement,” Center 
for American Progress, June 14, 2023. https://www.
americanprogress.org/article/safe-streets-for-all-an-
opportunity-to-rethink-traffic-enforcement/

3. 
U.S. Department of Transportation, National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, “Overview of 
Motor Vehicle Traffic Crashes in 2022,” Revised June 
2024. https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/
ViewPublication/813560

Livingston, Julie and Andrew Ross, Cars and 

4. 
Jails: Freedom Dreams, Debt, and Carcerality, OR 
Books, 2022 

Baumgartner, Frank, Derek A. Epp and Kelsey 

5. 
Shoub, Suspected Citizens: What 20 Million Traffic Stops 
Tell Us About Policing and Race, p. 16, Cambridge 
University Press, 2018

Pierson, et. al., “A large-scale analysis of racial 

6. 
disparities in police stops across the United States,” 
Nature Human Behaviour, 4(9) p. 859–866, May 4, 2020. 
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-020-0858-1

Croft, Jay, “Philando Castile shooting: Dashcam 

7. 
video shows rapid event,” CNN, June 21, 2017. https://
www.cnn.com/2017/06/20/us/philando-castile-
shooting-dashcam/index.html

LaFraniere, Sharon and Smith, Mitch, “Philando 
8. 
Castile Was Pulled Over 49 Times in 13 Years, Often for 
Minor Infractions,” The New York Times, July 16, 2016. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/17/us/before-

philando-castiles-fatal-encounter-a-costly-trail-of-
minor-traffic-stops.html

Kirkpatrick, David, Steve Eder, Kim Barker 

9. 
and Julie Tate, “Why Many Police Traffic Stops Turn 
Deadly,” The New York Times, October 31, 2021. https://
www.nytimes.com/2021/10/31/us/police-traffic-stops-
killings.html

10. 
eCourt* Kokua is available at https://www.
courts.state.hi.us/legal_references/records/jims_
system_availability

Hawaiʻi Court Records, “What Are Traffic 

11. 
Violations And Infractions In Hawaii,” 2024. https://
hawaiicourtrecords.us/traffic-court-records/violations/

12. 
Nelson, Leah, Frank Knaack and Dana
Sweeney, “Under Pressure: How fines and fees hurt 
people, undermine public safety, and drive Alabama’s 
racial wealth divide,” Alabama Appleseed Center for 
Law and Justice, 2018. https://alabamaappleseed.org/
wp-content/uploads/2018/10/AA1240-FinesandFees-
10-10-FINAL.pdf

ACLU of Hawaiʻi, “Decriminalizing Poverty,” 

13. 
Accessed December 13, 2024. https://www.acluhi.org/
en/issues/decriminalizing-poverty

Moyer, Justin, “More than 7 million people 

14. 
may have lost driver’s licenses because of traffic debt,” 
The Washington Post, May 19, 2018. https://www.
washingtonpost.com/local/public-safety/more-than-
7-million-people-may-have-lost-drivers-licenses-
because-of-traffic-debt/2018/05/19/97678c08-5785-
11e8-b656-a5f8c2a9295d_story.html

Data USA, “Hawaiʻi, Housing and Living, 

15. 
Transportation, Commuter Transportation.” https://
datausa.io/profile/geo/hawaii#mode_transport

16. 

ACLU of Hawaiʻi, December 13, 2024

18 • BEYOND THE TICKET

Prison Policy Initiative, “Hawaiʻi Profile,” 
17. 
Accessed November 8, 2024. https://www.prisonpolicy.
org/profiles/HI.html

18. 

Ibid

Decriminalizing Jaywalking and Shifting Investment  
Towards Safe, Accessible Pedestrian Infrastructure,” 
Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice, 
March 2024. https://hiappleseed.org/publications/
freedom-to-walk

HCR 85 Task Force, “Creating Better Outcomes, 

19. 
Safer Communities: Final Report of the House 
Concurrent Resolution 85 Task Force on Prison Reform 
to the Hawaiʻi State Legislature 2019 Regular Session,” 
December, 2018. https://www.courts.state.hi.us/wp-
content/uploads/2018/12/HCR-85_task_force_final_
report.pdf

20. 

Prison Policy Initiative, November 8, 2024

Campbell, Ethan C., “Ticket to Walk: How 

29. 
Jaywalking Enforcement Impacts Washingtonians,” 
Transportation Choices Coalition, January 23, 
2024. https://freetowalkwa.org/wp-content/
uploads/2024/01/Ticket-to-Walk_Research-
Report_2024.pdf

United for ALICE, “Hawaiʻi Overview,” 2022. 

30. 
https://unitedforalice.org/hawaii

21. 
Hawaiʻi Department of Transportation, “FFY 
2020 Highway Safety Annual Report,” March 2023.  
https://hidot.hawaii.gov/highways/files/2023/03/
HDOT-2020-Annual-Report-FINAL-low-res-single-pages.
pdf

Based Hawaiʻi Appleseed analysis of citation 

31. 
records for jaywalking-related offenses from the 
Hawaiʻi State Judiciary for the time period of 2018 to 
2023, as well as ALICE data for Hawaiʻi (see United for 
Alice, 2022)

Kim, Wookie, “HPD’s Pattern and Practice of 

22. 
False Arrests at Sobriety Checkpoints, Including That 
of Ammon Fepuleai,” ACLU of Hawaiʻi, November 
4, 2024. https://www.acluhi.org/sites/default/
files/2024.11.04_-_hpd_dui_checkpoint_demand_
letter_final.pdf

23. 

Ibid

24. 
Eisenberg, Rachel, Daniel Bodah and Brandon 
Tucker, “4 Ways the Department of Transportation Can 
Combat Racially Biased Police Traffic Enforcement,” 
Center for American Progress, March 22, 2024. https://
www.americanprogress.org/article/4-ways-the-
department-of-transportation-can-combat-racially-
biased-police-traffic-enforcement/

25. 

Baumgartner, 2018

32. 

Eisenberg, 2024

33. 
Council of the District of Columbia, “D.C. Law 
21-125: Neighborhood Engagement Achieves Results 
Amendment Act of 2016,” 2016. https://code.dccouncil.
gov/us/dc/council/laws/21-125

ACLU Analytics & ACLU of the District of 

34. 
Columbia, “Racial Disparities in Stops by the 
Metropolitan Police Department: 2020 Data Update,” 
March 10, 2021. https://www.acludc.org/sites/default/
files/field_documents/2021_03_10_near_act_update_
vf.pdf

35. 

Ibid

National Conference of State Legislators, 

36. 
“Traffic Stop Data,” 2021. https://www.ncsl.org/civil-
and-criminal-justice/traffic-stop-data

“Act 212: Relating to Motor Vehicles,” Thirty-

26. 
Second Legislature of the State of Hawaiʻi, July 5, 2024. 
https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/sessions/session2024/
bills/GM1313_.PDF

California Legislative Information, “AB-2147 

37. 
Pedestrians,” 2022. https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/
faces/billTextClient.xhtml?bill_id=202120220AB2147

27. 

Ibid

28. 

Seitz, Abbey, “Freedom to Walk: 

Dai, Jovi, “California logs 7.5% drop in fatal 

38. 
crashes in 2024 from previous year,” The Mercury 
News, January 4, 2025. https://www.mercurynews.

BEYOND THE TICKET • 19

ENDNOTES

com/2025/01/03/california-sees-drop-in-crashes-2024/

Claxton, Kevin, “Governor Newsom Signs 

39. 
Freedom to Walk Act,” California Bicycle Coalition, 
2022. https://www.calbike.org/tag/jaywalking/

Campbell, 2024. Per the report, as of early 

40. 
2024, an estimated 52 million Americans lived in 
places where jaywalking was decriminalized. However, 
in October, 2024, New York City (population appx. 
8 million), decriminalized jaywalking, bringing the 
national total to 60 million.

Defender Association of Philadelphia, “Traffic 

41. 
Stops in Philadelphia: What is Driving Equality,” 
Accessed January 6, 2025. https://driving-equality.
phillydefenders.org/driving-equality#10

50. 
Wilson, Kea, “Berkeley To Become the First US 
City To De-Cop Traffic Enforcement,” Streetsblog USA 
July 16, 2020. https://usa.streetsblog.org/2020/07/16/
berkeley-to-become-the-first-us-city-to-de-cop-traffic-
enforcement

51. 
Browning, Kellen and Jill Cowan, “How 
Berkeley Could Remove the Police From Traffic Stops,” 
The New York Times, July 9, 2020. https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/07/09/us/berkeley-ca-police-department-
reform.html

Fatima, Dahir, “Alternatives to Police Traffic 

52. 
Enforcement in the Bay Area,” Stanford Center for 
Racial Justice, April 24, 2023. https://law.stanford.
edu/2023/04/24/alternatives-to-police-traffic-
enforcement-in-the-bay-area/

42. 

Ibid

Defender Association of Philadelphia, “Traffic 

43. 
Stops in Philadelphia: Do Traffic Stops Promote Safety,” 
Accessed January 7, 2025. https://driving-equality.
phillydefenders.org/safety

44. 

Ibid

Defender Association of Philadelphia, January 

45. 
6, 2025

“Act 214: Relating to the Expungement of 

46. 
Criminal Records,” Thirty-Second Legislature of the 
State of Hawaiʻi, July 9, 2024. https://www.capitol.
hawaii.gov/sessions/session2024/bills/GM1346_.PDF

California Legislative Information, “SB-731 

47. 
Criminal Records: Relief,” 2022. https://leginfo.
legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_
id=202120220SB731

Narayan, Sanjoy, “What you pay is what you 

53. 
got: The thing about Finland’s pioneering income-
based fines,” The Economic Times, September 19, 
2024. https://m.economictimes.com/opinion/et-
commentary/what-you-pay-is-what-you-got-the-thing-
about-finlands-pioneering-income-based-fines/amp_
articleshow/113466964.cms

The Global Health Observatory, “Estimated 

54. 
road traffic death rate (per 100 000 population),” World 
Health Organization, April 15, 2024. https://www.
who.int/data/gho/data/indicators/indicator-details/
GHO/estimated-road-traffic-death-rate-(per-100-000-
population)

55. 

Ibid

Schierenbeck, Alec, “The Constitutionality of 
56. 
Income-Based Fines,” The University of Chicago Law 
Review, 85(8) p. 1869-1925, December 2018. https://
lawreview.uchicago.edu/sites/default/files/01%20
Schierenbeck_ART_Post-SA%20%28JJ%29.pdf

48. 

Ibid

49. 

Ibid

20 • BEYOND THE TICKET