Title: Food is Medicine
Date: unknown
URL: https://hiappleseed.org/publications/food-is-medicine
PDF: https://hiappleseed.org/s/Food-Is-Medicine_Report_FINAL-knl4.pdf
============================================================

JANUARY 2025

FOOD IS MEDICINE +

AN ASSESSMENT OF HAWAI‘I’S FOOD AND 

NUTRITION SERVICES LANDSCAPE

H AWA I‘I   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

www.hiappleseed.org

Authors: Daniela Spoto, Jordan Smith
Report made possible with support from The Harry and Jeanette Weinberg Foundation and Stupski Foundation
Cover Image: iStock

Hawaiʻi Appleseed is committed to a more socially and economically just Hawaiʻi, where everyone has genuine 
opportunities to achieve economic security and fulfill their potential. We change systems to address inequity 
and foster greater opportunity by conducting data analysis and research to address income inequality, educating 
policymakers and the public, engaging in collaborative problem solving and coalition building, and advocating 
for policy and systems change.

The work of Hawaiʻi Appleseed is about people. The issues we work on—housing, food, wages, mobility, the state 
budget and taxation, and racial and indigenous equity—are important because they ensure people have access 
to shelter, sustenance, and the means to survive and thrive individually and collectively. Addressing these issues 
requires the knowledge and expertise of the people that have first-hand experience and live with the adverse 
consequences of our flawed systems.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction

Hawai‘i’s Food and Nutrition Support Services Landscape

•  What Types of Nutrition Services Are Available?

•  How Are Services Delivered?

Feedback from Hawai‘i Stakeholders

Recommendations

Appendices

Endnotes

Acknowledgements

3

5 

7

8 

11 

15 

21 

26 

27

Copyright © 2025 Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice. All rights reserved. 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1180, Honolulu, HI 96813

2 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

INTRODUCTION

Figure 1. Grounding “Food Is Medicine” in Hawaiian Values

Community Wellness, Food and Nutrition Education

MTM*

Medically 
Tailored Groceries

Produce Prescription & 
Protein Boxes

SNAP, WIC, School Meals, 
Emergency Food Programs

Empowered Local Farmers

‘Āina Accountability

Population-Level Healthy Food Policies

“Food is medicine” is a 
foundational truth in many 
indigenous cultures. In 
Hawai‘i, this goes beyond 
the medicinal potential of 
food itself, to encompass 
the notion that food is often 
one’s most direct connection 
to ‘āina (land). Having close 
connections to where and 
how one’s food is grown 
is understood to be an 
essential component for 
restoring native Hawaiian 
health and wellness.1

*MTM = “Medically Tailored Meals”
Image credit: Hawai‘i Good Food Alliance (2024)

“FOOD IS MEDICINE” (FIM) is shorthand for a movement that aims to integrate food and nutrition into the 
modern healthcare system to prevent, manage, and treat various illnesses. Services typically include medically 
tailored meals, groceries, and/or produce boxes prescribed by a doctor or nutrition professional. Broader 
interpretations also include population-level healthy food programs,2 acknowledging the pervasive barriers to 
adequate nutrition, such as a lack of financial access, health literacy, time, skills, equipment, or social support.

In Hawaiʻi, food is medicine services (alternatively called “medically supportive food and nutrition services,” or 
simply “nutrition supports”) have existed in various forms for over a decade—supported in large part by private 
foundations and community benefits programs, and run by community-based food and nutrition organizations 
(referred to as CBOs in this report). These CBOs are essential, not only for client access to food, but also because 
they often play a critical role in connecting local farmers to consumers, nurturing a deeper connection between 
people and their food system.

It will take some additional effort to ensure that Hawaiʻi’s nutrition support services embrace this critical 
narrative; and to ensure that we develop systems that connect patients—not just to food, but to food that 
empowers local farmers and holds us accountable to ʻāina. 

Sustaining these community-driven programs in the long term will require integrating them into our modern 
healthcare system—a system many CBOs typically have had little interaction with in the past (beyond community 
benefits programs).  

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 3

INTRODUCTION

iStock

One mechanism states can use to begin this process is what is known as the Medicaid Section 1115 
demonstration waiver. This waiver authorizes states to use federal Medicaid funding to cover innovative services 
and financing mechanisms for a five-year test period. Hawaiʻi’s waiver was approved in January of 2025.

This report explores insights from selected Hawaiʻi-based and national innovators to help guide stakeholders 
through this transition. The report first provides a high-level overview of where we are now: what services are 
available in Hawaiʻi, including service delivery models and Hawaiʻi-based examples. The report then describes 
what is needed, summarizing feedback from stakeholders and briefly outlining the key systems and processes 
necessary to get CBOs set up to be reimbursed using Medicaid dollars. 

Finally, the report offers the following recommendations. Please note that these recommendations are not 
directed toward any particular agency, organization, or stakeholder group. Rather, they are intended to guide 
a collective partnership effort. The ultimate goal is putting Hawaiʻi’s Medicaid dollars to work, both to serve 
patients and to support Hawaiʻi’s community-based food systems.

•  Recommendation 1: Invest in Community Care Hubs 

•  Recommendation 4: Develop Model Contracts and 

(CCHs) and Network Leads 

Guidance for CBO partnerships 

•  Recommendation 2: Establish a Policy Advisory Body 
for Health-Related Social Needs (HRSN) Services 

•  Recommendation 5: Streamline Screening, Referrals, 

and Reimbursement Systems  

•  Recommendation 3: Develop Cross-Sector Financial 

•  Recommendation 6: Develop Shared Goals and 

Partnerships 

Metrics that Emphasize Local Food Procurement 

•  Recommendation 7: Designate Dedicated MCO-CBO 

Support Staff

4 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

 
 
HAWAI‘I’S FOOD AND 
NUTRITION SUPPORT 
SERVICES LANDSCAPE

States across the nation, including Hawaiʻi, have been integrating nutrition supports into their Medicaid programs 
by using what’s known as the Section 1115 Medicaid Demonstration Waiver.3 4 This five-year waiver allows states to 
test new approaches to delivering and financing Medicaid services that differ from what is normally allowed under 
federal rules. Once approved by the federal government, they allow for innovation within Medicaid, giving states 
flexibility to design programs that better meet the specific needs of their population.

Hawaiʻi’s waiver, approved in January 2025, includes the authority to cover the following nutrition support 
services: 1) nutrition education; 2) home-delivered meals or pantry restocking; 3) medically-tailored meals; and 4) 
nutrition prescriptions. More on Hawaiʻi’s 1115 Medicaid waiver can be found in Appendix A.

In alignment with the holistic framing of “food is medicine” described in the introduction, Hawaiʻi is unique 
among other states in its explicit commitment to supporting local farmers and food systems. The waiver states,

“Hawaiʻi will encourage the inclusion of local growers, community gardens, and other 
community-based organizations to support the purchase of locally grown food and 
strengthen Hawaiʻi’s intrinsic food system.” 

— Hawaiʻi Medicaid 1115 Waiver (page 53)

The waiver also notably authorizes the purchase of cooking supplies and supplies to grow fruits and vegetables. 

For this report, Hawaiʻi Appleseed surveyed a range of providers in an attempt to get a broad understanding of 
what is currently available statewide.5 We found that the landscape of nutrition service providers is diverse and 
includes many partners not traditionally involved in modern healthcare operations. 

A Note on Timeline: The state will use a phased approach for implementing each HRSN service. The timeline for this 
approach is evolving and will be spelled out in the state’s HRSN Implementation Plan, due to CMS by October 2025. 

HRSN services that were already implemented under the prior demonstration will be implemented at the beginning 
of the demonstration period for continuity of services. Nutrition support services will be phased in later as provider 
capacity and infrastructure are developed.

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 5

SUPPORT SERVICES LANDSCAPE

Figure 2. Food and Nutrition Service Providers by Island*

We heard from 23 organizations representing all the major Hawaiian islands.

Thirteen of these organizations 
currently accept insurance 
reimbursements from managed 
care organizations (MCOs). 

13

The other 10 respondents are 
considered “non-traditional health 
service providers.” These include 
food hubs, food banks, and other 
community-based organizations.

10

8

6

4

2

0

3

4

2

3

3

2

Kaua‘i

O‘ahu

Molokai

Lana‘i

Maui

Hawai‘i
Island

Statewide

Although conventional healthcare entities might be better equipped to meet the demands of integration into 
the healthcare system, non-traditional partners play a critical role in delivering services to meet health-related 
social needs (HRSNs), including nutrition supports. CBOs in particular often have established, deep community 
connections, ensuring services adequately address each community’s unique sociocultural needs.

6 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

What Types of Nutrition Services Are Available?

Service providers cited a variety of activities, delivery models, and focus populations when asked about their 
food and nutrition initiatives. A range of terms were used to describe similar services; however, it is important to 
note that there is not yet a standard, accepted definition for each type of service consistent across organizations. 
This report adopts the terminology used in Hawaiʻi’s 1115 waiver, which defines four broad categories of 
nutrition support services.6 These services are described in further detail in Appendix A:  
•  Nutrition education; 
•  Produce prescriptions or protein boxes; 
•  Healthy meals or pantry restocking†; and 
•  Medically-tailored meals or groceries. 

Providers were asked to self-report the types of services offered using these terms.

Figure 3. Types of Nutrition Support Services† Available Across All Islands

Currently Offer This Service

Do Not Currently Offer, Would Like To

25

20

15

10

5

0

11

10

5

14

4

9

10

5

6

†For the purposes of this 
survey, the category “meals and 
pantry restocking” was split 
into two categories: “Pre-made 
meals (non-medically tailored)” 
and “Home pantry restocking.”

Produce 
Prescriptions or 
Protein Boxes

Nutrition 
Education

Home Pantry 
Restocking

Medically 
Tailored Meals 
(MTM)

Pre-Made Meals 
(Non-Medically 
Tailored)

Key Findings 

• 

Among organizations surveyed, produce prescriptions or protein boxes were the most popular type of 
nutrition support service, with 21 out of 23 responding organizations stating they either currently offer 
or would like to offer these in the future. However, this service was delivered differently in nearly every 
community surveyed (as seen in the next section on service delivery models). 

•  Nutrition education was the second most popular, and the most widely available currently, with 14 

organizations responding that they currently offer, and another five stating that they would like to offer this 
service in the future. 

• 

Few meal providers participated in the assessment. None of the respondents indicated that they currently 
offer medically tailored meals, although a few organizations do currently offer non-medically tailored meals. 
This may be a sampling error, but could also indicate a capacity gap within Hawaiʻi’s provider network.

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 7

How Are Services Delivered?

In addition to the type of services offered, providers can use a variety of delivery mechanisms to fulfill the 
client's needs. For all the nutrition supports authorized in Hawaiʻi’s 1115 waiver (with the exception of nutrition 
education), clients will receive provisions of food—either meals, groceries, or produce or protein boxes.7 This 
means that, when considering delivery models, organizations have to weigh a variety of factors, including cost, 
availability, storage capacity, perishability, convenience for the client, and the unique needs and assets of the 
organization and community. Flexibility is key, as every community is different. 

Key Findings

•  Hawaiʻi is home to a variety of models, and in some cases, CBOs offer multiple ways to access a particular 

service, as seen in Figure 4.  

•  Providers often use the same terms for different service models. For example, the term “produce 

prescription” can mean a discount code provided to a patient for use at an online food hub, a weekly CSA 
box, a farmer’s market voucher, or some combination of these. 

• 

Service delivery models are not mutually exclusive but generally can be divided by two criteria: 1) custom vs. 
curated, and 2) market pick-up vs. home delivery. Each has its pros and cons, as shown in Figure 5.

Figure 4. Service Delivery Models, by Category†

Offered On-Site

Offered at Another Location for Pick-Up

Delivered to Client’s Home

Coupon, Gift Card or Voucher Provided

Medically Tailored 
Meals (MTM)

Home Pantry 
Restocking

Produce 
Prescriptions or 
Protein Boxes

*Includes organizations 
currently offering the service 
as well as those stating they 
would like to offer it in the 
future.

†Nutrition education was 
excluded from this analysis to 
only compare delivery models 
for the direct provision of food.

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Number of Organizations*

8 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

SUPPORT SERVICES LANDSCAPE

iStock

Home
Delivery

Figure 5. Pros and Cons of Various Service Delivery Models

Custom Grocery Order

Pickup at 
Market

PROS: Choice and ﬂexibility for 
patients

PROS: Flexibility, choice, and 
convenience for patients

CONS: Not all health centers have 
the capacity & infrastructure to 
operate markets

CONS: Can be costly and 
challenging for CBOs and vendors 

PROS: Most affordable and 
convenient option for CBOs. Allows 
farmers the ﬂexibility to offer 
items they have available

CONS: Least amount of patient 
choice and ﬂexibility

PROS: Allows farmers and food 
vendors ﬂexibility to offer items 
they have available

CONS: Less patient choice; 
Can add cost

Curated Grocery Box

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 9

SUPPORT SERVICES LANDSCAPE

Hawai‘i Examples

Service Delivery Model: Custom Food Orders 

Waiʻanae Coast Comprehensive Health Center

The center’s Produce Rx program provides a gift card that patients can redeem 
at one of their three Mākeke Farmers’ Market locations, or a discount code that 
can be redeemed online at FarmLink Hawaiʻi for a pre-approved list of items. 
Prescriptions are supplemented with free workshops on cooking, financial 
literacy, disaster prep, and gardening.

Service Delivery Model: Curated “CSA” Model

Kokua Kalihi Valley (KKV)

KKV delivers weekly produce boxes with a selection of root vegetables, greens, 
fruits and herbs directly to patients’ homes every week. All produce is sourced 
from KKV’s network of local farmers or through a partnership with FarmLink 
Hawaiʻi.

Service Delivery Model: Farmer’s Market

Waimanalo Health Center

Waimanalo Health Center offers a voucher for patients to use at the nearby 
Waimanalo farmers market, held Wednesday afternoons. Having an affiliated 
market can create an inviting gathering space for the community and help 
elevate the narrative that fresh, local food is part of healthcare.

Service Delivery Model: Home Delivery

FarmLink Hawaiʻi

FarmLink Hawaiʻi offers home deliveries for their direct clients and selected 
Oʻahu-based healthcare organizations offering produce prescriptions. They 
have committed to using in-house drivers and vehicles, rather than outsourcing 
to gig workers. While this comes at a cost ($11 per order, which they partially 
subsidize so clients pay only $6.99), they feel it is an important investment that 
ensures employees are provided liveable wages and benefits.

10 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

FEEDBACK 
FROM HAWAI‘I 
STAKEHOLDERS

As part of the assessment, Hawaiʻi Appleseed consulted public comments on the state’s 1115 waiver, and directly 
asked providers how they currently fund their programs, how they would expand their capacity if additional 
funding was available, and whether they had any concerns about transitioning to a Medicaid-reimbursement 
model. The following six key themes emerged from this feedback which have implications for the waiver rollout:

Figure 6. Stakeholder Feedback

6

Engage 
Stakeholders at
Every Level

5

Desire 
for Clear
Guidance

4

Keep
Flexibility
in Mind

Stakeholder 
Feedback
(Clockwise From
Top Right)

1

Concerns 
About Program 
Sustainability

2

Upfront 
Financial
Investment

3

Prioritize 
Locally-
Grown Food

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 11

STAKEHOLDER FEEDBACK

Theme 1: Concerns About Program Sustainability

Twenty-two out of the 23 providers we spoke to reported that the majority of nutrition support services are 
funded through grants and donations, highlighting the precarity of program longevity. Much of this funding 
comes from partnerships with healthcare organizations’ community benefits programs. 

Some respondents shared concerns that their ability to plan for the future is limited. A shift toward more 
sustainable, long-term sources of revenue, as proposed in Hawaiʻi’s 1115 waiver, can help alleviate this concern.

Theme 2: Upfront Investments in CBO Capacity

Hawaiʻi’s waiver authorizes spending up to 15 percent of total health-related social needs expenditures to 
support capacity-building efforts, At the time of waiver submission, this amount was estimated at $76.9 million 
over five years.8 Coupled with existing private investments, this financial support will help CBOs meet new 
partnership requirements. 

Many respondents lauded this decision, and a few provided suggestions for how the funds should be spent. 
Some providers said they would use additional funding to expand their service offerings, while others said they 
saw a need for professional development, technical assistance, and infrastructure investments. Some response 
highlights are in Figure 7. 

Figure 7. Stakeholder Responses Related to Upfront Financial Investments

Upgrade
Technology & 
Infrastructure

Training & Technical 
Assistance

Expand Service 
Offerings

Develop Networks 
of Care

“Professional 
development is key to 
ensuring our staff can 
meet the diverse 
needs of our 
community.”

“Additional funding 
would allow us to 
extend our hours of 
operation, making our 
services more 
accessible to working 
individuals.”

“[MQD should] 
designate a lead entity 
to work with a 
network of CBOs that 
address enrollee 
HRSNs.”

 “It would be helpful to 
have a lead  
organization who can 
act as the hub for a 
network of community 
organizations.”

“

“Upgrading our 
technology and 
equipment would 
greatly improve 
service efﬁciency.”

“Shared [referral 
platforms] will help to 
drive ... seamless 
community care 
coordination.”

12 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

STAKEHOLDER FEEDBACK

Theme 3: Prioritize Locally-Produced Food

Hawaiʻi has already shown consideration for stakeholder feedback and even demonstrated national leadership9 
by emphasizing locally-produced food in its 1115 waiver. Several stakeholders affirmed this priority, mentioning 
the added benefit of creating new market opportunities for local farmers and food businesses.

“ʻFood is Medicine’ programming has the potential to stimulate the local food economy by creating 
opportunities for local farmers, producers, and distributors. This program can contribute to a more 
sustainable and resilient food system, which aligns with our vision for a healthier and more self-reliant 
Hawaiʻi.”

— Hawaiʻi Good Food Alliance Public Comment on Hawaiʻi’s Section 1115 Waiver

“It would be easy for national-scale food businesses to engage in this new market space. It will be much 
more difficult to make sure that local food providers who are already doing the work to get healthy food to 
vulnerable communities can participate. We need to make every effort to make this possible.”

— Amy Miller, Hawaiʻi Foodbank CEO

Theme 4: Desire for Clear Guidance

Several respondents indicated that it would be helpful to have clear and straightforward guidance from the state 
on how to participate in the demonstration project. While a few public commenters offered specific suggestions 
on what type of guidance would be helpful (some of which are included in the recommendations section of this 
report), this sentiment came up more often as a general request, suggesting that a novice-level overview might 
be the most appropriate first step. 

A review of case studies and policy guidance from other states suggests that the process of integrating services 
into Medicaid can be generally divided into five buckets, as shown in Figure 8. Each of these systems will require 
varying levels of operational guidance, technology investments, training, and technical support. More detail on 
these five components can be found in Appendix C.

Figure 8. Systems Involved in Medicaid Service Integration

Provider 
Authorization

Contracting with 
MCOs

Patient Referrals

Reimbursement & 
Billing Systems

Data Tracking & 
Reporting

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 13

STAKEHOLDER FEEDBACK

Theme 5: Keep 
Flexibility in Mind

While clear guidance is 
critical, some providers 
expressed concerns about 
the potential administrative 
burden associated with 
accepting Medicaid 
reimbursements. A few 
respondents suggested 
that rigid requirements for 
participation could lead to 
compromises in the quality or 
type of care they know their 
community needs.

Theme 6: Engage Stakeholders at Multiple Levels  

An overarching sentiment that surfaced is that providers are excited to begin institutionalizing these services, 
seeing it as a way to expand, sustain them in the long term, and transition to a more preventative framework for 
health care. Several respondents and public commenters mentioned a desire to be involved on some level, and 
some offered their professional expertise and assistance with various components of implementation. 

Local food and nutrition stakeholders convene to discuss food-is-medicine at the quarterly gathering for the Hawai‘i Hunger Action 
Network, August 8, 2024

14 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

RECOMMENDATIONS

While this assessment identified a 
number of innovative service models 
and aspirations for Hawaiʻi’s nutrition 
supports rollout, taking these to scale 
will require a steep collective learning 
effort. In light of these observations, 
we conducted an examination of 
the lessons learned and solutions 
implemented by other states. 

This section outlines some general 
recommendations informed by 
these best practices that Hawaiʻi can 
emulate as it enters the next phase 
of implementation. Note that these 
recommendations have been gleaned 
from analysis of other states’ 1115 
rollout processes, as well as Hawaiʻi 
provider and other stakeholder 
feedback. They are not directed at any 
single entity, but rather provided as a 
guide for all stakeholders to consider as 
Hawaiʻi moves toward implementation.

•  Recommendations 1 through 3 

can be thought of as “partnership 
capacity building.” These 
recommendations are focused 
on the partnership landscape, 
including ways to strengthen the 
overall network of stakeholders 
and provide structure to how they 
engage with each other.  

•  Recommendations 4 through 
7 outline specific activities and 
systems that the state and other 
funding partners can put in place 
to support CBO participation in the 
managed care system.

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 15

© Getty Images via Canva

RECOMMENDATIONS

Recommendation 1: Invest in Community Care Hubs and Network Leads

Providers’ desire for clear guidance is indicative of just how complex providing nutrition support services can 
be within the managed care landscape. One solution that has proven successful in other states is to build and 
invest in what’s known as Community Care Hubs: entities that centralize administrative functions for a network 
of CBOs, helping them participate in partnerships more effectively.

An important feature of community care hubs (CCHs) is that they understand the values and capacities and have 
trusted relationships with the CBOs they support. 

There is no standard or one-size-fits-all model for a CCH. They may be focused exclusively on one type of service 
(like nutrition supports), a specific type of provider (like community health centers), or a specific geographic 
community. They typically provide the following to their CBO networks: 

•  Backbone Network Support: CCHs create regular and meaningful opportunities for CBOs and providers to 

learn from one another, coordinate on goals, share feedback, and brainstorm solutions. 

•  Direct Administrative Support: They can offer a range of administrative functions, including direct 

contracting with plans, providing patient referrals, or data tracking and reporting. 

•  Training or Technical Assistance: They may provide training or technical assistance for CBOs, or liaise 

between CBOs and MCOs on billing and reimbursement issues.

Figure 9. Sample Community Care Hub Model

Healthcare
Funding

Healthcare
Providers

Feedback 
from CBOs

MCOs 
Reimburse for 
Services Using 
Medicaid 
(Or Other Funding)

 Clinics & Hospitals 
Screen Patients 
During Routine 
Care & Refer for 
Services

Patient
Referrals

Community Care Hub

CBOs Deliver Services

Training & 
Technical Support

Connects Patients 
with CBOs

Data Tracking

Reimbursement
Distribution

Home-Delivered 
Meals

Food Boxes

Grocery Coupons 
& Vouchers

Nutrition & 
Garden Education

16 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

RECOMMENDATIONS

Supporting the Local 
Food System

In the nutrition 
supports sector, CCHs 
can be particularly 
effective in advancing 
Hawaiʻi’s stated 
intention to support 
the local food system. 
The Hawaiʻi Good 
Food Alliance is 
proposing the  ʻAiaola 
Center, a CCH that 
would coordinate 
administrative 
functions, funding, 
and operational 
infrastructure on 
behalf of their 
statewide network of 
CBOs and food hubs.

Recommendation 2: Establish a Policy Advisory Body for HRSN Services

There are several regulatory requirements and operational procedures that need to be considered to integrate 
health-related social needs (HRSN) services into Hawaiʻi’s managed care landscape. As seen in the assessment 
findings, early, meaningful stakeholder engagement in these discussions is paramount. This is for three primary 
reasons:

1. 

It will build the collective expertise within Hawaiʻi’s stakeholder network; 

2.  Collaborative design of these systems will surface innovative solutions to challenges that will inevitably arise; 

and 

3.  Regular stakeholder engagement will strengthen trust and relationships within the network.

While community care hubs are important for one-the-ground planning, provider support, and service 
coordination, these advisory bodies are focused on broader policy considerations. These include infrastructure 
funding, data sharing and privacy regulations, payment models, and more. There may be overlap in 
participation, but the purpose and outputs of these various entities are quite different. 

For more on the purpose and role of both types of entities, see Appendix B.

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 17

RECOMMENDATIONS

Recommendation 3: Develop Cross-Sector Financial Partnerships

As seen in this landscape assessment, nutrition support services are widely supported by various local 
foundations, government grants, and community benefits programs. Transitioning from this fragmented system 
to a more integrated approach will require public and private entities to establish common goals and coordinate 
resources strategically to achieve them.

Through the 1115 waiver application, Hawaiʻi has requested a federal investment to build the necessary 
infrastructure to implement and maintain HRSN services. The request is capped at 3 percent of total Medicaid 
expenditures (estimated at $76.9 million over 5 years).

This critical public investment can be amplified by strategically coordinating with the private funding sources 
that have already been supporting these services for the past several years. There are several different ways to 
structure these investments and partnerships, as seen in the following state-level examples:

•  Arizona: The CommunityCares CBO Incentive Program is unique in that it offers financial rewards for CBOs to 
meet certain milestones, like adopting the statewide HRSN closed-loop referral system and meeting certain 
performance metrics.10 While primarily state-funded, private foundations contribute financial support. 

•  California: CalAIM’s Capacity and Infrastructure Transition, Expansion and Development (CITED) initiative 

(part of their broader Providing Access and Transforming Health (PATH)  Initiative) provides funds directly to 
CBOs and other entities to support workforce development, technology upgrades, and physical infrastructure 
(i.e. refrigerated food storage, delivery trucks) for the delivery of HRSN services.11  

•  Massachusetts: CBOs received funding through both the state’s previous 1115 demonstration, and the 

recently approved demonstration. There are now three funds available: The Massachusetts Upstream 
(MassUP) Investment Program, Social Services Organization (SSO) Flexible Services Preparation Fund, 
and the future SSO Flexible Services Integration Fund. All are primarily state-funded initiatives aimed at 
capacity-building for CBOs. However, these funds may also leverage private partnerships for specific aspects 
of implementation, such as technology investments.12 The Integration Fund has a model grant agreement 
available.13

18 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

RECOMMENDATIONS

Recommendation 4: Develop Model Contract Templates

Model contracts between MCOs and CBOs (or CCHs) can make the early stages of the partnership much less 
daunting. They can also be used as a tool to encourage desirable outcomes, such as measuring certain health 
equity outcomes or prioritizing local growers.14 Examples:

•  California: Developed Provider Standard Terms & Conditions for Enhanced Care Management and 

Community Supports providers.15 It also developed Data Sharing Authorization Guidance.16 

•  North Carolina: Created two model contracts relating to CBO partnerships: a network-lead HSO model 

contract, intended for use between a Community Care Hub and a CBO (as seen in Recommendation 1, and a 
PHP network-lead model contract17 for plans to contract with CCHs.

Recommendation 5: Streamline Screening, Referrals, and Reimbursement Systems

Healthcare centers that don’t currently offer nutrition support or other HRSN services will need to develop 
systems to seamlessly connect patients with the appropriate CBO for services, while also protecting patient 
privacy. This referral process is typically conducted through a HIPAA-compliant18 electronic health record (EHR) 
system. 

Billing and reimbursement guidance for HRSN is still evolving, and the development of standardized billing and 
reimbursement codes and mechanisms is a key focus across states working on these initiatives. Examples:

•  Arizona: The state’s CommunityCares CBO Incentive Program offers CBOs up to $10,000 to adopt the 

statewide HRSN closed-loop referral system.19 

•  North Carolina: Referrals and billing/reimbursement are integrated through the NCCARE360 platform.20

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 19

RECOMMENDATIONS

Recommendation 6: Develop Shared Goals and Metrics that Emphasize Local Food 
Purchasing

Most states working to integrate HRSN into Medicaid have some high-level shared goals and metrics, developed 
with the support of an advisory body (as seen in Recommendation 2). These metrics typically include improved 
health outcomes, cost savings, reduced hospitalizations, and improved service delivery. 

In line with stakeholder feedback shared throughout this report, we recommend Hawaiʻi incorporate metrics 
around local food purchasing to integrate the benefits of supporting local farms and food businesses.

Recommendation 7: Designate Dedicated MCO-CBO Support Staff

CBOs and MCOs operate in different spheres and often use distinct language and systems to accomplish 
their objectives. This can lead to a lack of clarity when unique situations arise related to referrals, billing, 
reimbursement, and other specific scenarios. Some states have tried to mitigate this confusion by requiring 
MCOs to appoint or hire designated staff that can provide tailored technical assistance and support when CBOs 
run into an issue. Examples:

•  Arizona and New Jersey: In both states, MCOs must have a designated housing coordinator, which manages 

the provision of housing and housing resources to members.21 22 

•  California: MCOs must submit a narrative plan describing how they will partner with CBOs, among other 
service providers, and develop strategies for closing health disparities.23 In addition, PATH offers a virtual 
technical assistance marketplace that CBOs can access when challenges arise.

20 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

 
APPENDICES

Appendix A: Overview of Hawai‘i’s Medicaid Section 

1115 Demonstration Waivers

What are Section 1115 Demonstration Waivers?

Medicaid is a joint federal and state program providing health coverage to eligible low-income individuals. The 
program is administered at the state level but follows federal guidelines set by the Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS)  .

The Medicaid 1115 Demonstration Waiver is an optional five-year waiver that allows states to waive certain 
federal requirements in order to pilot innovative approaches to Medicaid service delivery or financing.24 Most 
projects must be budget-neutral, meaning the federal government's expenditures under the waiver cannot 
exceed what they would have been without the waiver  . An exception is authorized which allows states to spend 
no more than 3 percent of their total state Medicaid spend on health-related social needs (HRSN) and no more 
than 15 percent of their HRSN spending on HRSN-related infrastructure.25 

What’s included in Hawai‘i’s 1115 Demonstration Waiver Renewal?

Hawaiʻi’s Med-QUEST Division has been proactive in aligning its Medicaid services with community health needs. 

The renewed waiver introduces several new initiatives, notably under the “Community Supports” umbrella, 
which includes expanded HRSN services. One of the key additions is the inclusion of comprehensive nutrition 
support services. This initiative aligns with the state's goal to address food insecurity and promote better health 
outcomes  . Hawaiʻi’s waiver broadly outlines the following information for HRSN services:

1.  Authorized services;
2.  Service duration and frequency;
3.  Patient eligibility; and
4.  Provider qualifications.

The state will still need to provide the following to CMS:

Protocol for Assessment of Beneficiary Eligibility and Needs and Provider Qualifications

90 days after approval

HRSN Infrastructure Protocol

HRSN Implementation Plan

90 days after approval

9 months after approval

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 21

APPENDICES

Hawaiʻi’s waiver authorizes the following nutrition support services:

1. Nutrition interventions WITHOUT provision of food, including nutrition instruction. Individuals may receive 
up to 12 sessions per six-month period of eligibility.

Nutrition education topics that might be addressed include, but are not limited to:
• 
Food preparation;
•  Reading food labels;
•  Budgeting for meals;
•  Navigating grocery stores and farmer’s markets;
•  Gardening; and
•  Other topics to support access to healthy foods.

2. Nutrition interventions WITH provision of food. These services are limited to a duration of 6 months, 
renewable while the beneficiary continues to meet qualifying criteria. Services may include:

Home-delivered meals or pantry 
stocking (also referred to as 
grocery provisions)

Provides healthy meals, groceries, or supplies to grow fruits and vegetables to provide 
adequate food for an individual for up to three meals per day, seven days per week. 
Meals and pantry stocking may be provided through any combination of vouchers, 
spendable cards, and direct provision (e.g., premade meal delivery), and may be 
accessed via delivery, at the provider site, or through other arrangements.

Fruit and vegetable prescriptions 
and protein boxes (also referred 
to as nutrition prescriptions)

Provides fruits, vegetables, supplies to grow fruits and vegetables, and proteins through 
any combination of vouchers, spendable cards, and direct provision (e.g., subsidized 
food boxes, garden-based deliveries, etc.). Fruits and vegetables may be fresh, frozen, or 
canned. These prescriptions and boxes may be delivered, accessed at the organization 
site, or offered through other arrangements.

Medically tailored meals

Tailored to support individuals with a health condition(s) for which nutrition supports 
would improve health outcomes. Assessments for Medically Tailored Meals are 
conducted through nutrition counseling services (covered by the State Plan). This service 
includes:
1.  The preparation and provision of the prescribed meals, up to three meals a day, and 
2.  Delivery of the meal.

3. Provisions of cooking supplies that are necessary for meal preparation and nutritional welfare of a 
beneficiary. Note that this is authorized under a separate expenditure authority from HRSN, and require budget 
neutrality savings to offset expenditures

22 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

APPENDICES

Patient Eligibility for Nutrition Support Services

To qualify for nutrition support services, patients must meet the following requirements:

Enrolled in Medicaid

Have a “nutrition related 
need,” (i.e. meets the USDA 
definition of low or very 
low food security)

Meet at least one of the following clinical criteria:*
1.  Complex Behavioral Health Need
2.  Developmental Disability Need
3.  Complex Physical Health Need
4.  Needs Assistance with ADLs/IADLs or Eligible for LTSS
5.  Health Conditions related to trauma, Repeated Emergency 
Department Use, Repeated Hospitalizations, and Elevated 
Mental Health Services
6.  Pregnant/Postpartum

*These criteria are further defined in Hawai‘i’s 1115 Waiver Approval document, Attachment F.26

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 23

APPENDICES

Appendix B: Stakeholder Engagement Entities

Purpose and Role

Outputs and Activities

Scale

Makeup

Policy 
Advisory 
Body

To provide policy 
recommendations on 
integrating nutrition 
supports and other 
HRSN into Medicaid

Policy and systems 
recommendations

Statewide

State officials, policy 
experts, managed 
care plans, healthcare 
providers, CBOs, 
advocates, other 
stakeholders

Network 
Lead

To provide administrative 
support and technical 
assistance to a network 
of smaller CBOs

Action plans, reports

Community 
Care Hub

To provide administrative 
support and technical 
assistance to a network of 
smaller CBOs

Service coordination, 
contract management, 
data tracking

County 
or region 
(sometimes 
feeding into 
a larger 
statewide 
network)

Healthcare providers, 
CBOs, vendors, local 
governments and h
ealth departments

24 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

Appendix C: Key Systems and Processes

APPENDICES

Authorization to Provide Services
Hawai‘i’s Med-QUEST Division requires providers to register using their online HOKU 
enrollment system in order to become authorized for Medicaid reimbursement.

Contracting with Managed Care Organizations
To provide reimbursable services to Medicaid patients, CBOs will need to enter into a 
legally-binding contract with one of the state’s Medicaid managed care plans. Model contracts 
that can be adapted for each partnership are an ideal way to kickstart this process and make it 
feel less daunting.

Patient Screening and Referrals
Our assessment found that many community health centers in Hawai(cid:31)i are already regularly 
screening for food insecurity and other HRSNs. However, those without in-house services will 
need to develop referral systems that can seamlessly connect patients with the appropriate 
services, while also protecting patient privacy. This referral process is typically conducted 
through a HIPAA-compliant electronic health record (EHR) system. 

Reimbursement and Billing Systems
Unlike grant-based funding (which most services in Hawai‘i currently rely on), Medicaid billing, 
reporting, and reimbursement is based on encounters with beneﬁciaries. This transition can be 
one of the biggest challenges for CBOs wishing to provide nutrition and other community 
support services. 

Allowing CBOs to invoice, rather than requiring integrated claims billing, allows partnerships to 
get up and running at early stages, and then move to integrated billing once the partners have 
their balance.

Reporting and Evaluation
CBOs and MCOs often have different deﬁnitions of success. It is crucial to co-develop shared 
goals and metrics that resonate with both parties to ensure effective partnership and shared 
success. This should include metrics that are relevant to the social services provided by CBOs, 
not just health outcomes.

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 25

ENDNOTES

1. 
Maunakea-Forth, Kukui, et al, “ʻĀina Aloha, 
Hoʻola Lāhui: Maʻo Youth Leadership Training (Ylt) 
Restoring The Health & Well-Being Of The Land 
& People,” ʻImi Naʻauao: Hawaiian Knowing and 
Wellbeing Final Report, University of Hawaiʻi–West 
Oʻahu, December 2019. https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/346473751_Imi_Naauao_Hawaiian_
Knowing_and_Wellbeing_Final_Report

Mozaffarian, Dariush et al, “A Food is Medicine 

2. 
approach to achieve nutrition security and improve 
health,” Nature Medicine 28(11), p. 2238–2240, October 
6, 2022. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC10851911

3. 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 
“Section 1115 Demonstrations State Waivers List,” 
United States Department of Health and Human 
Services. https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/section-
1115-demo/demonstration-and-waiver-list/index.html

Hanson, Erika, et al, “The evolution and scope 

4. 
of Medicaid Section 1115 demonstrations to address 
nutrition: a US survey,” Health Affairs Scholar 2(2), 
February 2024. https://doi.org/10.1093/haschl/qxae013

5. 
This assessment is not intended to be a 
comprehensive directory of food and nutrition services 
in Hawaiʻi. While we made every attempt to contact 
providers on all islands, the diversity of organizations 
within the scope of this assessment is limited to 
those in which food, nutrition, and/or health care 
services (as defined within the state’s Medicaid 1115 
demonstration waiver renewal) are the primary service 
provided, those who responded to our inquiry, and/or 
were referred to us directly.

6. 
Hawaiʻi Department of Human Services, 
“Section 1115 Application,” State of Hawaiʻi, February 
1, 2024. https://medquest.hawaii.gov/content/dam/
formsanddocuments/med-quest/section-1115-
demonstration-renewal-for-2024/HI%20Section%20
1115%20Application%202.1.2024.pdf

26 • FOOD IS MEDICINE

Hawaiʻi Department of Human Services, 

7. 
February 1, 2024

U.S. Centers for Medicaid and Medicare 

8. 
Services, "Hawaiʻi QUEST Integration, 1115 Waiver 
Approval," U.S. Department of Health & Human 
Services, January 8, 2025 https://www.medicaid.gov/
medicaid/section-1115-demonstrations/downloads/hi-
quest-int-dmnstn-aprvl-01082025.pdf

Hanson, Erika, Alissa Wassung et al, “Food is 

9. 
Medicine: A State Medicaid Policy Toolkit,” Harvard Law 
School Center for Health Law and Policy Innovation, 
July 2024. https://www.healthlawlab.org/wp-content/
uploads/2024/07/Food-is-Medicine-A-State-Medicaid-
Policy-Toolkit-2024.pdf. (Hawaiʻi was recognized on 
page 34 for its emphasis on strengthening the state’s 
local food system.)

Contexture (Arizona’s Health Information 

10. 
Exchange), CommunityCares website. https://
contexture.org/communitycares

California Department of Health Care Services. 

11. 
CalAIM PATH website. https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/
CalAIM/Pages/CalAIM-PATH.aspx

Massachusetts Health Policy Commission, 
12. 
MassUP Investment Program website. https://masshpc.
gov/cdt/investment-programs/massup

Health Resources in Action, Massachusetts 

13. 
HRSN Integration Fund website. https://hria.org/tmf/
hrsn-integration-fund/HRSN

As suggested by one public commenter, “the 
14. 
solicitation and model contract language for a lead 
entity could include the state's proposal language 
encouraging the inclusion of local growers, community 
gardens, and other community-based organizations 
to support the purchase of locally grown food and 
strengthen Hawaii's intrinsic food system."

Massachusetts Health Policy Commission, 
15. 
MassUP Investment Program website. https://masshpc.
gov/cdt/investment-programs/massup

www.ncdhhs.gov/php-network-lead-model-contract/
download?attachment 

California Department of Health Care Services. 
16. 
“CalAIM Data Sharing Authorization Guidance,” March 
2022. https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/
CalAIM-Data-Sharing-Authorization-Guidance.pdf

California Department of Health Care Services. 

17. 
“ECM and Community Supports Standard Provider 
Terms and Conditions,” October 2022. https://www.
dhcs.ca.gov/services/Documents/MCQMD/ECM-and-
Community-Supports-Standard-Provider-Terms-and-
Conditions.pdf

HIPAA, or the Health Insurance Portability and 

18. 
Accountability Act of 1996, is a federal law that requires 
that patients' health information is kept confidential 
and not disclosed without their consent. (Source: U.S. 
Department of Health & Human Services. “HIPAA Laws 
and Regulations Summary,” 2003. https://www.hhs.
gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/laws-regulations/
index.html

Contexture (Arizona’s Health Information 

19. 
Exchange), CommunityCares website. https://
contexture.org/communitycares

21. 
Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, 
ACC Contract No. YH19-0001, Amendment 13, effective 
October 1, 2021, p. 65. https://www.azahcccs.gov/
Resources/Downloads/ContractAmendments/ACC/
ACC_Amendment13_UFC-14%20_HC%20&%20
UHCCP15_MOL(YH19-0001).pdf

New Jersey Department of Human Services, 

22. 
Care Management Resources. https://www.nj.gov/
humanservices/dmahs/info/resources/care

California Department of Health Care Services, 

23. 
“CalAIM Incentive Payment Reporting Template: 
Narrative Measures for Payment 1,” September 2021. 
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/CalAIM-
Incentive-Payment-Reporting-Template-Narrative-
Measures-for-Payment-1.pdf

Medicaid Program. U.S. Code Title 42 U.S.C. 

24. 
§ 1396n. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/
USCODE-2010-title42/pdf/USCODE-2010-title42-chap7-
subchapXIX-sec1396n.pdf

Although the initial waiver submission included 
25. 
gardening supplies, this was later removed upon initial 
review by CMS.

North Carolina Department of Health and 

20. 
Human Services, “Healthy Opportunities Pilot: PHP 
Network Lead Model Contract,” October 2021. https://

U.S. Centers for Medicaid and Medicare 

26. 
Services, January 8, 2025

Acknowledgements

• 

ʻElepaio Social Services / Waianae Coast 
Comprehensive Health Center
Farm Link Hawaiʻi
The Food Basket, Inc.

• 
• 
•  Hana Health
• 
•  Hawaiʻi Island Community Health Center
•  Hawaiʻi Foodbank
•  Hawaiʻi Foodbank Kauai Branch
•  Hawaiʻi Good Food Alliance
•  Hawaiʻi Pacific Health

The Harry and Jeanette Weinberg Foundation

•  Hawaiʻi Primary Care Association
•  Hoʻola Lahui Hawaiʻi
•  Kahumana Organic farm and Food Hub
•  Kaiser Permanente Hawaiʻi
• 
The Kohala Center
•  Kokua Kalihi Valley
• 
Lanai Community Health Center
Lanakila Pacific
• 
•  Mālama Kauaʻi
• 
Stupski Foundation
•  Waimanalo Health Center

FOOD IS MEDICINE • 27

28 • FOOD IS MEDICINE