Title: Eviction Prevention Through Hawaiʻi’s Tenant-Landlord Mediation Program
Date: unknown
URL: https://hiappleseed.org/publications/eviction-prevention-mediation-hawaii
PDF: https://hiappleseed.org/s/Eviction-Prevention-Report_FINAL-2.pdf
============================================================

H AWA IʻI   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

Eviction Prevention Through Hawaiʻi’s 
Tenant-Landlord Mediation Program

OCTOBER 2022

H AWA IʻI   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

Authors: Ray Kong, Kenna StormoGipson, Abbey Seitz, Gavin Thornton
Cover Image: Jess Vide

Hawaiʻi Appleseed envisions a Hawaiʻi that puts its people first—a Hawaiʻi where everyone can meet their 
basic needs while living happy, healthy and creative lives. We advocate for economic justice for and with 
Hawaiʻi’s people.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Acknowledgments 

Executive Summary

Background 

•  The Act 57 Mediation Program
•  The Pre-COVID Summary Possession 

Mediation Program

•  The Summary Possession During COVID 

Mediation Program

•  Comparison of the Three Mediation 

Programs

Methodology

•  Quantitative Methods
•  Qualitative Methods

Insights From a Review of the Data

•  Overview of Different Outcomes 

• 

Between Programs
January–June 2019 Pre-Covid Summary 
Possession Mediations

3

4

6

6
7

8

8

9

9
10

12

12

13

• 

• 

June 2021 to August 2022 Summary 
Possession During COVID Mediations
June 2021 to August 2022 Act 57 
Mediations

Interview Insights

•  Mediators
•  Attorneys
•  Tenants

Analysis of the Potential Impacts of Each 
Factor

•  Pre-Litigation Mediation
•  Availability of Rent Relief
•  Time for Mediation
•  Mediator Characteristics
•  Video Conferencing
•  Other Potential Factors

Conclusion and Recommendations

Endnotes

13

15

16

16
17
19

20

20
21
22
23
23
24

26

28

Copyright © 2022 Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice. All rights reserved. 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1180, Honolulu, HI 96813

2 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

Urban 
Honolulu, 
Hawaiʻi // Jess 
Loiterton

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This report was funded by the Housing Crisis Research 
Collaborative (“HCRC”). HCRC is supported by the 
Wells Fargo Foundation and JPMorgan Chase & Co. 
and managed by the Urban Institute. We are grateful to 
HCRC and to all of our funders, who make it possible 
for Hawaiʻi Appleseed to conduct research and 
advance its mission. The views expressed are those 
of the authors and should not be attributed to the 
Housing Crisis Research Collaborative or its funders.

Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic 
Justice would like to thank and acknowledge Tracey 
Wiltgen and her staff at the Mediation Center of the 
Pacific for their assistance in providing the source 
documents and data that were the focus of this 
report, and for Tracey’s insight into the program. We 
would also like to thank Joni Chun of the Susannah 
Wesley Center for her contributions to discussions 
and this report.

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 3

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

EVICTIONS ARE HARMFUL for everyone involved. Landlords and tenants both want stability in housing 
arrangements. For landlords, the process of eviction and finding new tenants is costly. For tenants and 
their families, the costs are even higher: A forced move may mean the loss of their security deposit 
and belongings, a change in schools, a longer commute to work, and a negative mark on their rental 
history that can make finding suitable housing more difficult. For some tenants, eviction will result in 
homelessness. Finding ways to increase housing stability by resolving disputes between landlords and 
tenants benefits everyone.

This study aims to ascertain whether or not there are ways to increase housing stability by examining the 
temporary measures Hawaiʻi put into place in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. To avoid the threat of 
mass evictions brought on by large scale job loss, Hawaiʻi created rent relief programs that helped tenants 
and landlords cover rent shortfalls, and created a pre-litigation mediation program through enacting Act 57 
(2021), which is the primary focus of this study.

The unique circumstances created by the pandemic permitted the examination of three different 
mediation programs that varied with respect to timing of the mediation (pre-litigation versus post-case 
filing), duration of mediation, availability of rental relief, use of video conferencing, and other factors. To 
better understand the comparative outcomes of the different approaches to landlord-tenant mediation, 
the research team for this study analyzed data on the outcomes from these three different approaches. 
Additionally, the team conducted 20 one-on-one interviews with attorneys, tenants and mediators 
involved in the Act 57 mediation program to better understand the participants’ perceptions about the 
mediation process.

The analysis revealed that Act 57 pre-litigation mediations had far higher rates of success when compared 
to the other two programs, both of which held the mediation post-filing of an eviction action (known 
as “summary possession” in Hawaiʻi and elsewhere)—one in effect prior to the pandemic and the other 
during. Within the samples reviewed for the study, 87 percent of the Act 57 cases resulted in settlement 
compared to 47 percent of pre-COVID summary possession mediationsn and 52 percent for the summary 
possession meditations during COVID. 

More significantly, of the mediated settlement agreements reviewed for the study, 85 percent of Act 57 
cases resulted in the tenant remaining in their home, which only occurred 11 percent of the time in the 
pre-COVID summary possession settlements, and 20 percent of the time in the summary possession 
settlements during COVID.

The outcome data, coupled with the participants’ perceptions, suggests the following insights:

4 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Kailua, Hawaiʻi 
// Brian Garrity

•  The availability of rental relief is a key factor to ensuring housing stability, but combining rent relief 

with a robust pre-litigation mediation process is likely to lead to significantly better outcomes than rent 
relief alone.

•  Holding mediation prior to litigation rather than during is likely to help mediation participants avoid 

an eviction filing and from developing entrenched positions, which can reduce the pressure on tenants 
to accept settlements that require them to move out, increasing the likelihood of tenants remaining in 
place.  

•  Mediation by video conferencing may provide tenants with more comfort and confidence than they 

would have in an intimidating court environment, placing the parties on a more even field, even if the 
landlord is represented by counsel at mediation. 

•  Providing adequate time to mediate may alleviate pressure to rush to a settlement, and contracting paid 
mediators who are skilled at finding solutions that are mutually beneficial to the needs of both landlords 
and tenants may increase the likelihood of agreements that permit tenants to stay in their home. 

Based on these insights, this report recommends that the Act 57-type mediations be continued in a 
manner that permits further study of the efficacy of its features, and that the mediation program be paired 
with emergency rent relief that is more widely available than what existed pre-pandemic.  

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 5

BACKGROUND

During the pandemic, Hawaiʻi—as in other states—saw many of its residents lose their jobs, or incur other 
economic hardships as a result of COVID-19. A moratorium on evictions for failure to pay rent was issued by 
the governor, which was extended several times.1

The state and its counties used federal pandemic-relief funds to create a rental and utility relief program to 
assist tenants who were unable to pay their rent due to loss in income, and to help avoid a loss in income 
for landlords and utility providers relying on tenants’ payments. The program for the City & County of 
Honolulu—Hawaiʻi’s most populous county, from which the data for this study was collected—ultimately 
approved relief of over $188 million for 14,651 households.2

The specific requirements for the rent relief program evolved during the course of the pandemic, but the 
program generally required proof of a valid tenancy, rent delinquency, loss of income due to Covid-19, and 
a gross household income not exceeding a certain threshold (80 percent of the HUD Area Median Income 
in the most recent iteration of the program). Payments through the program were made directly to the 
landlord. Landlords who evicted tenants would forgo their ability to receive any rent from the Program.

Applications could be initiated either by the tenant or the landlord through an online portal, after which 
contracted community-based organizations would work with the landlord and tenant to complete the 
application.3 Due to the high volume of applicants and the time-intensive nature of processing the 
applications because of documentation and other requirements, it took many months to get the rental 
relief into the hands of all the landlords and tenants who requested it. 

THE ACT 57 MEDIATION PROGRAM

In anticipation of the end of Hawaiʻi’s eviction moratorium in August of 2021, the state passed Act 57 (2021), 
establishing a landlord-tenant mediation program for the purpose of preventing an onslaught of evictions 
for tenants who had fallen behind on rent.4 As noted by Hawaiʻi’s legislature in the bill, at the time, tens of 
thousands of residents were still unable to pay rent due to pandemic-related job loss, many of whom had 
not yet been able to access the available rental relief.5

Act 57 created a temporary pathway for landlords and tenants to mediate in lieu of litigating an eviction 
case in court.6 Under the Act 57 program, before landlords could file a summary possession action due to 
non-payment of rent, they were required to provide tenants with notice of the opportunity to schedule a 
mediation session within 15 days from the date of the notice. In the City & County of Honolulu, the landlord 
was also required to submit the notice to the Mediation Center of the Pacific (“MCOP”), the entity hired by 
the county to carry out the mediations under Act 57.

The landlord could not proceed with a summary judgment action for 30 days from the date they provided 

6 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

 
 
BACKGROUND

Urban 
Honolulu, 
Hawaiʻi // 
Aleksey 
Kuprikov

notice to MCOP, which would allow the mediation to take place before the landlord could pursue legal 
action. If the tenant opted-in to mediate the dispute, MCOP would schedule a free 1.5 hour mediation 
session for the landlord and the tenant, facilitated by a trained and seasoned mediator. 

MCOP accepted 75 applications and interviewed 35 people, hiring 15 mediators as independent 
contractors. All 15 contractors were seasoned mediators with private practices who had experience in 
the landlord-tenant arena, and who were available and willing to mediate 4–6 cases a day, six days a 
week. They were selected based on criteria such as their understanding of effective management of 
power imbalances, their sensitivity to working with different cultures, and experience working with 
interpreters. As independent contractors, they managed their own video conferencing accounts and sent 
the confidentiality agreement out to landlords and tenants, as well as reminders, thereby establishing a 
foundation of trust earlier in the process with both landlord and tenant.

THE PRE-COVID SUMMARY POSSESSION MEDIATION PROGRAM

Prior to the pandemic, Hawaiʻi already had a landlord-tenant mediation program in place. The existing 
mediation program differed from the Act 57 program in several ways, including: 

•  Mediations occurring after the summary possession court process was well underway (rather than prior 

to case filing under Act 57); 

•  The length of the mediation sessions (20–30 minutes versus 90 minutes under Act 57 mediations);

•  Being required to make an in-person appearance in court (rather than using video conferencing in Act 

57 mediations); and 

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 7

BACKGROUND

•  The use of volunteer mediators rather than paid professionals. 

Another important difference, although not an explicit feature of the mediation program, was the 
availability of pandemic-response rent relief, which Act 57 mediators could refer the parties to—something 
that was not available pre-pandemic.

THE SUMMARY POSSESSION DURING COVID MEDIATION PROGRAM

Although the vast majority of mediations conducted during the pandemic were done through the Act 57 
process, some were not. Landlords could file a summary possession action during the eviction moratorium 
if the grounds for eviction included allegations regarding a breach of non rent payment-related lease 
conditions, such as the tenant refusing to vacate the property after the landlord provided notice of their 
desire to sell. 

In these circumstances, landlords were required to provide tenants with a 45-day notice of lease 
termination before filing a summary possession case with the court. In this way, even where non-payment 
of rent appeared to be a primary factor for the eviction, landlords could attempt to circumvent the 
moratorium by providing the 45 day notice and including allegations regarding grounds for termination 
other than non-payment of rent. 

Cases that proceeded in this manner did not go through the Act 57 process. Instead, the Judiciary required 
the parties to participate in a mediation program that retained the post-filing/pre-trial timing of the pre-
COVID summary possession mediation program, but adopted the other features of the Act 57 program 
(namely providing 1.5 hour mediations, and the use of video conferencing). Additionally, as with the Act 57 
program, the landlords and tenants involved in summary possession mediations conducted during COVID 
had access to the large-scale pandemic rental relief program that was not available pre-COVID.

COMPARISON OF THE THREE MEDIATION PROGRAMS

Program

Pre-Litigation

Volunteer 
vs. Hired 
Professional 
Mediator

Time Allowed or 
Mediation

Availability of 
Rental Relief

Mediation 
Over Video 
Conferencing

Allegations by 
Landlord

Pre-Covid 
Summary 
Possession

No

Volunteer

20–30 Minutes

No

Act 57

Yes

Hired 
Professional

1.5 Hours

Yes

Summary 
Possession 
During Covid

No

Volunteer

1.5 Hours

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Non-Payment 
of Rent and/or 
Other

Non-Payment of 
Rent

Non-Payment 
of Rent and/or 
Other

8 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

METHODOLOGY

To understand the comparative outcomes of the three different approaches to landlord tenant mediation 
analyzed by this study, the research team analyzed outcome data from the three different approaches and 
conducted interviews to gain insight into the perceptions of mediation participants.

QUANTITATIVE METHODS

The Mediation Center of the Pacific (MCOP) maintains a database of all the landlord-tenant mediations 
they conduct on the island of Oʻahu, including the three approaches examined by this study. MCOP 
provided the research team with data on the following:

•  All of the eviction cases mediated by MCOP from January 2019 to June 2019, totaling 92 cases (the “Pre-

COVID Summary Possession Data Set”).

•  All of the eviction cases mediated by MCOP from August 2021 to August 2022 under the Act 57 program, 

totaling 1,378 cases (the “Act 57 Data Set”).

•  All of the eviction cases mediated by MCOP from August 2021 to August 2022 that were done outside of 

the Act 57 process, totaling 183 cases (the “Summary Possession During COVID Data Set”).

The data provided for each of the cases in the three datasets listed above indicated whether a settlement 
was reached, and it included limited demographic data such as the income and zip code of the tenant.
Determining whether the settlements resulted in the tenant remaining in place required a review of the 
settlement agreements for each case. Because a review of all of the settlement agreements in all of the 
data sets was not feasible within the resources available for this study, samples from each data set were 
reviewed as follows:

•  Pre-COVID Summary Possession Data Set: Of the 92 cases that were mediated, 43 settled. MCOP 
reviewed all 43 settlement agreements and provided the research team with data on which of the 
agreements resulted in the tenant remaining in place. Generally, all contested cases are sent to 
mediation by the judge before trial.

•  Act 57 Data Set: Of the 1,378 cases that were mediated, 1201 settled. MCOP provided the research 

team access to a sample of 41 settlement agreements to determine in which cases the tenant remained 
in place. To obtain a geographically diverse sample, MCOP selected an even distribution of cases by zip 
code, but otherwise selected at random.  

•  Summary Possession During COVID Data Set: Of the 183 cases that were mediated, 96 settled. Using 

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 9

METHODOLOGY

Heʻeia, Hawaiʻi 
// Will Caron

a selection process similar to the one used to generate the Act 57 sample of settlement agreements, 
MCOP provided the research team access to a sample of 31 settlement agreements to determine in 
which cases the tenant remained in place. 

In addition to reviewing the settlement agreements to determine whether the tenant remained in place 
post-settlement, the review was used to determine the following:

•  Whether the parties were represented by counsel; 

•  Whether rental relief was mentioned in the settlement agreement; 

•  Whether the agreement indicated the tenant would remain in place as an ongoing tenant; and 

•  Whether the agreement required the tenant to pay back all back rent;

The research team then used this data to examine the various factors that may have contributed to the 
differing outcomes under each of the three programs.

QUALITATIVE METHODS

To gain insights from the perceptions of program participants, a total of 20 interviews were conducted over 
the course of three weeks. Interviewees were all individuals who participated in mediations after August 
2021 as follows:

•  Six mediators (all of whom participated in the Act 57 mediation program);

10 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

 
METHODOLOGY

Kailua, Hawaiʻi 
// Rich Howard

•  Two attorneys (one representing multiple landlords and one representing multiple tenants, both of 

whom participated in all three mediation program categories);

• 

12 tenants (one of whom participated in the Summary Possession During-COVID mediation program; 11 
who participated in the Act 57 mediation program); 

•  No landlords were interviewed because none responded to outreach efforts for the study. 

All of the interviewees were identified by MCOP. The tenants who received outreach emails were selected 
at random. MCOP sent an email to an initial batch of 40 tenants, half of whom went through the Act 57 
mediation program, and half of whom went through the Summary Possession During COVID mediation 
program. The initial batch of emails garnered eight tenant interviews. A second batch of tenants was 
emailed to secure an additional four tenant interviews. 

MCOP reached out to all of the mediators that participated in mediations after August 2021, eight 
responded, and six were ultimately interviewed. 

On Oʻahu, there are two attorneys that handle the vast majority of landlord representation in summary 
possession cases, and one attorney that handles most of the tenant representation (in the relatively rare 
instances where tenants are represented). One of the two landlord attorneys and the sole tenant attorney 
were interviewed. 

All of the interviews were conducted by the same interviewer utilizing the same set of questions created for 
each category of interviewee. 

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 11

INSIGHTS FROM A 
REVIEW OF THE DATA

OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENT OUTCOMES BETWEEN PROGRAMS

Based on a review of the data from the three different programs—Pre-COVID Summary Possession 
mediations, Act 57 mediations, and Summary Possession During COVID mediations—along with the review 
of the mediation agreements included in the samples, it is clear that the mediations conducted under the 
Act 57 program had overwhelming positive outcomes relative to the other mediation programs. 

While dealing with 15 times the number of cases mediated pre-COVID, settlement rates were 40 percent 
higher under the Act 57 program. More importantly, of the cases that settled and that were reviewed for the 
study, the Act 57 program resulted in 74 percent more tenants remaining as ongoing tenants than in the 
pre-COVID sample.

Program

Number of 
Mediations

Number of 
Mediations that 
Settled

Percent of 
Mediations that 
Settled

Number of 
Settlement 
Agreements 
Reviewed

Percent of 
Reviewed 
Agreements that 
Results in Tenant 
Leaving Property

Percent of Reviewed 
Agreements that 
Results in Tenant 
Remaining as Ongoing 
Tenant

Pre-Covid 
Summary 
Possession

92

43

Act 57

1,378

1,201

Summary 
Possession 
During Covid

183

96

47%

87%

52%

43

41

31

89%

15%

80%

11%

85%

20%

When compared to the Summary Possession During COVID mediations, the Act 57 mediations retained 
much higher rates of settlement and housing stability for the tenants (87 percent of cases settled under Act 
57 versus 52 percent under the Summary Possession During COVID mediations; 85 percent of settlements 
in the Act 57 sample resulted in the tenant remaining in place versus 20 percent in the Summary 
Possession During COVID sample).

12 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

DATA INSIGHTS

Notably, there was a relatively small difference between the percentage of mediations that settled between 
the Pre-COVID Summary Possession and Summary Possession During COVID mediations (47 percent versus 
52 percent). Additionally, of the settlement agreements reviewed from each of those data sets, there was a 
relatively small difference in the percentage of agreements that resulted in the tenant remaining in place 
(11 percent versus 20 percent). 

In trying to ascertain the impact of rent relief, it is interesting to note that such relief was available to the 
participants of both the Act 57 and Summary Possession During COVID mediations, yet the outcomes were 
vastly different. The outcomes for the Summary Possession During COVID participants were only marginally 
better than the outcomes for the Pre-COVID Summary Possession participants despite the availability of 
rent relief for the former, but not the latter. Taken together, these comparisons suggest that the availability 
of rental relief, on its own, may have only a slight impact on mediation outcomes. 

This does not mean the availability of rental relief is inconsequential. Indeed, information garnered from 
the data provided by MCOP and participant interviews demonstrates that rent relief was used frequently 
in the mediated settlements in which tenants retained their housing. Rather, the information considered 
for this study suggests that, to be effective, rent relief needs to be combined with other factors. One such 
factor is likely timing the mediation prior to the commencement of litigation rather than after—one of the 
primary differences between the Act 57 and Summary Possession During COVID processes. Another factor 
could be differences in the pool of mediators used for the different types of mediations. 

JANUARY–JUNE 2019 PRE-COVID SUMMARY POSSESSION MEDIATIONS

To help establish a baseline of mediation outcomes, we reviewed data from a six-month period prior to 
COVID—approximately January through June of 2019. During this time period, 92 summary possession cases 
were mediated. Of those, 47 percent reached agreement, and of those cases agreed, 11 percent allowed 
the tenant to remain in the residence as an ongoing tenant. This means that 89 percent of settled cases still 
resulted in the tenant leaving the property. These mediations were conducted without any availability of 
rental assistance, as those programs had not been set up yet and COVID had not yet impacted the ability of 
tenants to pay rent. The settlement agreements did not contain enough information to determine if the case 
was brought due to non-payment of rent, other reasons, or a combination of the two.

JUNE 2021 TO AUGUST 2022 SUMMARY POSSESSION DURING COVID MEDIATIONS 

We reviewed data and settlement agreements from June 2021 through August 2022 for cases that were 
referred to mediation by the court after landlords initiated a summary possession case. These cases 
avoided the Act 57 requirement of pre-litigation mediation by alleging lease violations in addition to non-
payment of rent.

Other than the route by which these cases arrived in mediation, the most significant differences between 
the Act 57 mediations and the During-COVID Summary Possession Mediations were the timing of the 
mediations (pre-litigation versus mid-litigation) and the pool of mediators conducting the mediations 
(paid professional mediators versus volunteers). 

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 13

 
DATA INSIGHTS

Waikīkī, 
Hawaiʻi // Jess 
Loiterton

During this time period, 183 summary possession cases were mediated. Of those, 52 percent reached 
agreement. Of the 31 settlement agreements reviewed in this category, 20 percent of the agreements 
allowed the tenant to remain in the residence as an ongoing tenant. This means that 80 percent of settled 
cases still resulted in the tenant leaving the property, slightly less than the 92 percent of Pre-COVID 
Summary Possession settled cases in which tenants moved out.  

In the sample of settlement agreements reviewed under this category, landlords were represented by 
counsel 54 percent of the time. Tenants were represented by counsel less than 1 percent of the time. 

Number of 
Mediations

Number of 
Mediations 
that Settled

Percent of 
Cases that 
Settled

Sample Size 
of Cases 
Reviewed

2021

2022

Combined 
2021 and 
2022

94

89

183

46

50

96

49%

56%

52%

18

13

31

14 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

Percent of 
Settled Cases 
that Resulted 
in Tenant 
Leaving 
Property

Percent of 
Settled Cases 
that Resulted 
in Tenant 
Remaining 
as Ongoing 
Tenant

Percent 
Landlords 
Represented 
by Counsel

Percent 
Tenants 
Represented 
by Counsel

72%

28%

61%

<1%

92%

8%

46%

<1%

80%

20%

54%

<1%

DATA INSIGHTS

Waimea 
(Oʻahu), 
Hawaiʻi // Jess 
Vide

JUNE 2021 TO AUGUST 2022 ACT 57 MEDIATIONS

We reviewed data and settlement agreements from June 2021 through August 2022 for the Act 57 cases. 
Under Act 57 during this time period, 1,378 mediations were conducted. Of those, 87 percent reached 
agreement. Of the 41 settlement agreements reviewed in this category, 85 percent of tenants remained in 
the home. All of the agreements noted that the tenant would repay all back rent owed, with 66 percent of 
the agreements explicitly noting that rental assistance would be used to do so. In this sample, 5 percent of 
landlords were represented by counsel and none of the tenants were. 

Number of 
Mediations

Number of 
Mediations 
that Settled

Percent of 
Cases that 
Settled

Sample Size 
of Cases 
Reviewed

Percent of 
Settled Cases 
that Resulted 
in Tenant 
Leaving 
Property

Percent of 
Settled Cases 
that Resulted 
in Tenant 
Remaining 
as Ongoing 
Tenant

Percent 
Landlords 
Represented 
by Counsel

Percent 
Tenants 
Represented 
by Counsel

2021

447

392

88%

20

15%

85%

0%

0%

2022

931

809

87%

Combined 
2021 and 
2022

1,378

1,201

87%

21

41

14%

86%

9%

0%

15%

85%

5%

<1%

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 15

 
INTERVIEW INSIGHTS

MEDIATORS

Of the six mediators interviewed, one resides in Hawaiʻi and the other five reside in the Continental United 
States. The mediators interviewed for this study were screened and hired specifically to participate in 
the Act 57 mediation program. They did not participate in either the Pre-COVID Summary Possession 
or Summary Possession During COVID mediation programs, which each utilized local volunteers who 
conducted mediations at court. Because of this, we were unable to compare mediator perspectives across 
the different programs.

Each mediator interviewed noted that they had conducted approximately 100 mediations. Each mediator 
reported a settlement rate of between 85 and 95 percent, and most recalled that in at least 90 percent 
of the settled cases, the tenant was allowed to remain as an ongoing tenant. These recollections were 
consistent with the data provided by MCOP and the sample of mediation agreements reviewed. 

The mediators noted that they had direct access to those administering rental relief, so they were able 
to find out where the tenant was in the application process, whether they had been approved and were 
just awaiting funds, and whether tenants could still apply for rental assistance. All of the mediators who 
were interviewed conducted their mediations over video conferencing, and noted that a few participants 
logged in from the Mediation Center of the Pacific, but most participants logged in from their home or 
other personal location. The mediators felt that video conferencing was instrumental in helping tenants to 
speak more freely, because they were in a comfortable location, and they were not physically present with 
the landlord. Several mediators noted that some of the participants also turned their camera off, which 
allowed them to speak more freely and more comfortably. 

Some mediators utilized joint sessions over video conferencing, while others primarily separated the 
parties. This seems to have been largely a choice of personal style by the mediator and does not seem 
to have contributed to the success rate of settlement or keeping tenants in place. Mediators reported no 
issues using video conferencing.

Several of the out of state mediators participated in both Hawaiʻi’s Act 57 mediation program as well as 
mediation programs in their home state. For those who did both, they all noted that Hawaiʻi’s program was 
better than the program in the state they were in, specifically because of the access to rental relief and the 
relatively high frequency of mediations they conducted on a regular basis. They felt that having a constant 
stream of mediations allowed them to become experts in how the Hawaiʻi mediations could be resolved 
using Hawaiʻi’s rental relief program.

In discussions with the Executive Director of the Mediation Center of the Pacific, she noted that she 

16 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

 
INTERVIEW INSIGHTS

specifically hired mediators who she felt, through discussion and interviews, would be skilled at initially 
helping the tenants and landlords view each other as individuals with mutual financial challenges 
created by the outstanding rent owed by the tenant. She felt this skill would promote greater creativity in 
negotiations that would enable the tenant to remain in the residence while meeting the financial needs 
of the landlord. She noted that this approach may be different from the pre-COVID, 20-minute summary 
possession mediations, which she believed were often primarily focused on how much a tenant could pay 
and when they would move out.

All of the mediators felt that rental relief was the primary contributor in being able to settle so many 
cases with tenants being able to remain in place as ongoing tenants. Although the majority of settlements 
included a component of rental relief, there were still a significant number of settlements that did not 
explicitly reference rental relief but included a payment plan to catch the tenant up on back rent. 

Mediators were asked about the time they had to conduct mediations. The 1.5 hours allowed (and 
sometimes multiple sessions) is a dramatic increase from the 20–30 minutes allowed in Pre-COVID 
Summary Possession mediations. Mediators felt that the time given was a reasonable amount. They 
reported that some meditations were able to be settled more quickly than the time allotted, while some 
required an additional session.

ATTORNEYS

There are very few attorneys on Oʻahu who represent residential landlords and tenants in eviction-related 
disputes. Two attorneys were interviewed for the study: an attorney who represents many landlords and 
an attorney that represents many tenants. The attorneys interviewed had experience with all three of 
the mediation programs examined in this study, though most of their experience was with the Pre-COVID 
Summary Possession mediations, followed by the Summary Possession During COVID mediations. The 
tenants’ attorney noted that in many of the Act 57 mediations, his office provided general advice to tenants 
but did not represent them at the mediations. 

Both attorneys thought that pre-trial mediation would be a positive for all sides. Each recognized the 
different mindset that a landlord is in once litigation has been initiated and they have begun to incur its 
financial costs. 

The landlord attorney’s main concern with a pre-trial mediation program was that the process needed to 
be efficient with less return to court dates. He noted that, during COVID, due to the number of appearances 
required before finally going to trial, the cost to evict a tenant nearly doubled. He believed that because 
of these extra costs and the time lost, once a landlord went down this road, they were adamant about 
eviction, and a settlement in which the tenant remains in the unit is less likely. The delays could be 
attributed to the backlog of cases/mediations that backed up during the eviction moratorium, and an 
ongoing program would hopefully not see the same delays. 

Additionally, if a pre-litigation program is put in place, landlords and tenants could avoid return to court 
dates entirely, because no summary possession case would have been filed before the mediation took place. 

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 17

INTERVIEW INSIGHTS

Pūpūkea, 
Hawaiʻi // Jess 
Loiterton

The landlord attorney also expressed concern about the time it could take to get to mediation. He 
believes it is important that mediations are scheduled and occur quickly once the parties agree to the 
process. If the mediation does not occur quickly, he believes it will deter landlords from agreeing to take 
part as they seek quick resolution of their dispute.

Both attorneys reported no issues with using video conferencing for mediations, and said that they 
actually preferred using it because of its convenience. The landlord attorney commented that he felt that 
video conferencing mediation reduced some of the leverage or advantage he and the landlord might 
otherwise have at court, because there is an intimidation factor for tenants going to court. He noted that 
if a tenant goes to court, the judge explains the situation to the tenant, sends them to a mediator, and the 
tenant is usually “beaten down” so they end up going along with whatever is suggested. There might be 
some discussion over when they can leave, but the discussion is more of “when they will leave” and not 
“if they will leave.” 

In the context of litigation, the tenant often has little option but to settle and voluntarily leave or else 
return to court where the judge will likely rule against them anyway. This might explain why several of 
the settlement agreements from the Summary Possession During COVID mediation sample resulted in 
settlements where the tenant agreed to leave and agreed to pay the outstanding rent. 

The tenant attorney remarked that it was a benefit to use paid mediators who focused on trying to keep 

18 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

INTERVIEW INSIGHTS

tenants in place. Similar to the views of the landlord attorney and the MCOP executive director, the tenant 
attorney believed that, due to the short amount of time available for volunteers to mediate summary 
possession cases, there seems to be a focus on reaching agreement on when the tenant can move out 
instead of trying to mediate a solution where the tenant remains in the unit and stays on as a tenant. 

TENANTS

Twelve tenants were interviewed for this study. One of the tenants participated in mediation as part of the 
Summary Possession During COVID mediation program, while the rest of the tenants interviewed were part 
of the Act 57 program. Only two of the 12 tenants interviewed left the property as part of the settlement, 
one of whom was the tenant that went through the Summary Possession During COVID program. Ten of the 
11 tenants interviewed who went through the Act 57 program remained in place as ongoing tenants with 
some agreement to pay back rent through either rental assistance or through a payment plan. 

All of the tenants reported that their mediation was over video conferencing and that video conferencing 
was easy to use. Only one of the tenants went into the mediation center to use a computer there, while the 
rest logged in from home. The majority of tenants indicated they used their cell phone. Only one tenant 
indicated a brief issue with the technology, which was solved by logging out and logging back in. 

Two of the interviewees reported slight difficulties in getting the mediation scheduled or a lack of 
response, while the rest applauded the ease of the process. 

Two of the participants had heard of the program through news sources. Four heard about the program 
from their landlord. One was sent to mediation from the court. The rest of the tenants heard about the Act 
57 program for the first time in the notice they received informing them of their right to mediate before the 
landlord could file a summary possession action.

All of the tenants interviewed reported that this was their first time mediating and that their mediator 
was skillful. All felt they could speak freely because they were more comfortable speaking over video 
conferencing rather than in court and in the same location as the landlord. Some tenants were told the 
mediator was from out of state, but they did not think it had any effect on the outcome of the mediation.
Most of the tenants utilized rental assistance to make up any back rent. The few that did not agreed to use 
some form of payment plan to catch up. 

None of the tenants interviewed were represented by counsel. Although not represented at mediation by 
counsel, several of the tenants interviewed noted that they had spoken with an attorney for some advice 
before the mediation. A few reported that the landlord had an attorney at the mediation and “he did all 
the talking.”

Most of the tenants noted that they understood where their landlord was coming from and understood 
that the landlord was out of money and they did not hold it against them that they got a notice to be 
evicted. They were glad the process existed so they could talk and try to work it out. Eleven out of 12 of the 
tenants interviewed reported that the mediation was over quickly, in under 40 minutes.

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 19

ANALYSIS OF THE 
POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF 
EACH FACTOR

PRE-LITIGATION MEDIATION

In Hawaiʻi, and around the country, mediations in eviction cases typically take place after a case has been 
filed.7 Day-of-trial mediation programs have been found to be associated with reductions in eviction or 
a mitigation of their consequences.8 Yet some studies suggest that pre-litigation mediation may be even 
more effective. 

In one such study in which mediation providers were interviewed, the providers believed that offering 
mediation to the parties before an eviction is filed is advantageous to all parties.9 The study points out that 
pre-litigation mediation may be better at resolving disputes because parties tend to harden their positions 
once they get to court, especially as costs associated with litigation mount.10

Another examination of mediations in the context of evictions points to the fact that even when tenants dispute 
the grounds for eviction, they may be afraid to raise their defenses in the intimidating atmosphere of the 
courtroom.11 As noted by the study, “On the day of trial, tenants are under tremendous psychological pressure 
to agree to any terms presented by the landlord to keep a roof over their children’s heads.”12 In addition to 
mitigating this pressure, the study points out that pre-filing mediation helps tenants avoid a stain on their rental 
history that can make it difficult to find housing in the future. Furthermore, pre-filing mediation has the potential 
to provide the parties more time to secure rental assistance that could address rent shortfalls.13

The suggestion that pre-litigation mediation may be more effective than mediations held during the course 
of litigation is supported by the data analyzed by the present study, in which one of the primary differences 
between Act 57 mediations and Summary Possessions During COVID was the timing of the mediation. 

The perceptions of the mediation participants interviewed for the present study also align with this 
conclusion. Both of the attorneys interviewed expressed the belief that pre-trial mediation was a positive 
for both landlords and tenants, and each attorney likewise recognized the different mindset that a landlord 
is in once they are in litigation and have begun to incur the costs of litigation. While none of the tenants 
interviewed had any prior experience with being involved in an eviction case that had been filed in court, 

20 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

ANALYSIS OF FACTORS

some expressed their belief that going to court would be “harder” or “more intimidating.”

The landlord attorney interviewed for the present study identified the potential drawback of pre-litigation 
mediation resulting in a delay for a landlord seeking eviction if the mediation proved to be unsuccessful. 
But we determined the following potential advantages of pre-litigation mediation:

•  A higher rate of settlements that help the landlord recover past due rent while allowing the tenant to 

remain in place;

•  Savings in time and money for the parties by avoiding litigation; and

•  A reduced burden on the court system when disputes are settled through mediation before a case is 

ever filed.  

AVAILABILITY OF RENT RELIEF

There is no question that rent relief played a key role in the settlement of unpaid rent issues between 
landlords and tenants. According to Princeton University’s Eviction Lab, which tracks eviction data from 
across the country, “the communities that were able to distribute rental assistance had lower displacement 
rates”14 and “[a]s rental aid programs started closing, eviction filings overall have reached nearly the same 
level as before the pandemic.”15

The data and interviews from the present study supports the suggestion that rent relief is key. Out of the 41 
settlement agreements reviewed from the Act 57 process, all of them noted that the tenant would repay all 
back rent owed, with 66 percent of the agreements explicitly noting that rental assistance would be used to 
do so. It is unclear whether the remaining 33 percent did not utilize rental assistance or if the mediator just 
did not make reference to it in the settlement agreements.

All of the mediators interviewed confirmed their belief that rent relief was the primary reason so many 
cases settled with an agreement for the tenants to remain in their homes. Both attorneys believed that 
rent relief assisted in settling disputes. All but one of the tenants interviewed mentioned that they had 
received, or would be receiving, some form of rent relief. Some of the tenants expressed their belief that 
the availability of rental relief helped pay the past due rent, which was key to their landlord's decision to 
allow them to stay in the home as an ongoing tenant.

Although the importance of rent relief is clear, its availability in the Summary Possession During COVID 
process did not translate to a high settlement rate or a high rate of tenants being able to reach settlements.16 
This suggests that rent relief alone is not sufficient to ensure housing stability, and other factors may have an 
impact on the outcome, such as whether mediation was conducted before versus during litigation. Another 
important factor is the true motivation of the landlord. Whether the landlord is trying to recover unpaid rent, 
or wants to terminate the relationship with the tenant, could affect whether a case is more or less likely to 
settle and whether the landlord agrees to allow a tenant to remain as an ongoing tenant. Unfortunately, these 
motivations are impossible to know or quantify without landlords providing their reasoning.

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 21

ANALYSIS OF FACTORS

View of 
Portlock from 
Koko Crater, 
Hawaiʻi // Jess 
Loiterton

TIME FOR MEDIATION

Mediation is a process that requires the mediator to establish credibility with both parties so that each 
party feels comfortable speaking freely, while also listening to recommendations made by the mediator. 
The ability to make connections with mediation participants, no matter how skilled the mediator is, takes 
time—as does exploring creative options for settlement. As such, it seems likely that the amount of time 
allocated for mediation is important and directly affects the outcomes of the mediation.

Before COVID, summary adjudication actions were usually sent to mediation if both parties appeared for 
their return date hearing or trial. At the courthouse, voluntary mediators await assignment, then attempt to 
settle the case within 20–30 minutes, before the parties need to return to court. With such a short amount 
of time, mediators have little time to establish connections with participants and explore creative options 
for settlement.

22 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

ANALYSIS OF FACTORS

Mediations under both the Act 57 program and the Summary Possession During COVID programs provided 
90 minutes for the mediations to be conducted. 

The data reviewed for the present study does not reveal any strong suggestions that the additional time 
resulted in better outcomes. Pre-COVID Summary Possession mediations conducted in less than 30 
minutes had a 47 percent settlement rate. The 90-minute Summary Possession During COVID mediations 
had a similar settlement rate of 52 percent, while the Act 57 mediations, with the same 90 minute 
mediations had a much higher settlement rate of 87 percent. 

However, both the mediators and attorneys interviewed believed that the additional time was important. 
All of the mediators felt that at least 45 minutes were needed to establish the necessary relationships with 
mediation participants to allow for a meaningful session, and they reported that they sometimes needed 
additional time. The attorneys interviewed noted that the shorter mediation session may affect the options 
a mediation can explore, and would explain why pre-covid mediation were so focused on mediating a date 
by which the tenant would move out instead of exploring potentially more complex options under which 
the tenant could remain in place as an ongoing tenant.

MEDIATOR CHARACTERISTICS

The Act 57 mediations were conducted by a different pool of mediators than both the Pre-COVID Summary 
Possession and Summary Possession During COVID mediations. The summary possession mediations were 
mediated by a volunteer mediator from Hawaiʻi. Act 57 mediations were conducted by paid professional 
mediators hired specifically for the program, and either residing in Hawaiʻi or in the Continental United 
States. The paid mediators handled a higher volume of cases and, as related by MCOP, they were hired 
specifically for their commitment in trying to find ways to help landlords and tenants reach agreements 
that allowed tenants to remain as ongoing tenants while repaying the landlords for rent owed. 

Because the use of the paid mediators was one of few differences between the Act 57 and Summary 
Possession During COVID programs, it is possible that the difference in the mediation pool had an impact 
on mediation outcomes. This possibility is supported by both MCOP and the attorneys interviewed for 
the study, who all noted that mediators who conducted mediations pre-COVID were largely focused on 
resolving a case by determining when a tenant would move out instead of focusing on exploring other 
options, while the hired mediators were specifically focused on finding ways to keep tenants in place.  

VIDEO CONFERENCING

Video conferencing was used for both Act 57 and Summary Possession During COVID mediations, not as an 
attempted improvement to the mediation process, but as a byproduct of the pandemic. 

Prior to using video conferencing for the mediations, there was a concern that its use might pose a barrier 
to participants that lacked access to the appropriate technology, and that mediation over video would 
make it more difficult for the mediator and the parties to build rapport. On the other hand, potential 
advantages included:

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 23

 
ANALYSIS OF FACTORS

• 

Increased access to mediation because of not having to take time off from work or having to find child care;

•  Reduced intimidation that tenants can experience in a formal court setting, helping to mitigate the 

power imbalance between landlord and tenant; and

•  Elimination of the time and expense of travel.

Again, the data reviewed for the present study does not provide conclusive evidence of whether video 
conferencing had any impact on mediation outcomes. The Summary Possession During COVID mediations 
had slightly better success rates than Pre-COVID Summary Possession mediations in terms of the 
percentage of cases settled (52 percent versus 47 percent) and percentage of tenants that remained in the 
unit (20 percent versus 11 percent). 

However, the use of video conferencing was one of multiple differences between the Summary Possession 
During COVID and Pre-COVID Summary Possession mediations (others included differences in the 
mediation pool, the time allocated for mediation, and the availability of rent relief). 

While the data collected reveals little, the interviews conducted for the study indicate that participants 
believed the use of video conferencing fostered better outcomes, or at the very least, was a welcome 
convenience. 

Mediators noted that most participants logged in from their home or personal location, while a few 
logged in from the Mediation Center of the Pacific. The attorneys interviewed stated that they had no 
problems with the technology, and they favored the convenience of mediating via video conference over 
in-person meetings. 

Tenants reported that video conferencing was easy to use, and primarily used their phones to access the 
software. They reported no major technology issues. These comments suggest that the lack of access to 
technology was not a significant barrier to participation in mediation. 

Additionally, the mediators interviewed believed that video conferencing was instrumental in helping 
tenants speak more freely, because they were in a more comfortable location than a courthouse and they 
were not physically present with the landlord. The mediators reported that some of the participants also 
turned their camera off, which the mediators believed allowed the participants to speak more freely and 
comfortably. Similarly, the landlord attorney commented about the potential loss of leverage for landlords 
without the intimidation factor for tenants of having to go to court.

OTHER POTENTIAL FACTORS

In addition to differences in design of the three mediation programs and the availability of rent relief, 
it should be noted that there are other factors that may have impacted the outcomes of the different 
mediation programs. 

24 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

ANALYSIS OF FACTORS

One such factor is the potential that landlords may have been more willing to entertain settlement in the 
unique environment created by the pandemic. When the pandemic hit, a large number of tenants lost their 
jobs and were unable to pay rent. 

Landlords may have perceived that their tenants were not “bad tenants” that needed to be replaced. 
Rather, they may have been perceived as victims of a circumstance that was out of their control and 
impacted many people at the same time. In such a scenario, landlords may have been more willing to try 
to keep their current tenants housed rather than seeking to replace them with new tenants, provided the 
inability to pay the rent did not become a chronic problem. 

The above consideration might explain, at least in part, why Act 57 mediations had a much higher 
settlement rate than Pre-COVID Summary Possession mediations. But it would not explain why the 
settlement rates between Pre-COVID and Summary Possession During COVID mediations were so similar. 

One possible explanation—outside of the other factors discussed above—is that landlords who used the 
Summary Possession During COVID process may have been more intent on terminating the tenancy than 
landlords who submitted to the Act 57 process. 

To avoid the Act 57 pre-filing mediation requirement, even when rent delinquency was one of the reasons 
why the landlord wanted to evict the tenant, the landlord had to allege alternative reasons for eviction, 
such as wanting to sell the unit or the tenant’s destruction of property. It is possible that landlords who 
used the Summary Possession During COVID process had legitimate reasons for evicting their tenants 
outside of rent delinquency, which could not be addressed by mediation. Or landlords who used the 
Summary Possession During COVID process even though their primary motivation for eviction was the 
rent delinquency may have done so because they were intent on eviction and were hoping to expedite the 
tenant’s removal. 

A final factor that may have contributed to the difference in outcomes between the various mediation 
programs is the presence of attorneys at the mediations. It is notable that in the Summary Possession 
During COVID mediations, landlords were represented by attorneys 54 percent of the time, while they were 
represented only 5 percent of the time in Act 57 cases (tenants were represented less than 1 percent of the 
time in both types of mediations). 

While the data suggests that the presence of attorneys may have led to fewer settlements and fewer 
instances of tenants remaining in their homes, it also suggests that attorneys were more likely to be 
present when mediation is conducted during litigation as opposed to before, so mediation design may 
address the issue. 

It is likely that these additional factors had some influence on the outcomes of the Act 57 and Summary 
Possession During COVID meditations. Nevertheless, the data reviewed by the present study in combination 
with the information garnered from participant interviews strongly suggests that mediation design and the 
availability of rent relief had a significant positive influence on the outcomes of Act 57 mediations. 

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 25

CONCLUSION AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS

The Act 57 program ended on August 6, 2022, in what should be considered resounding success. The 
percentage of mediations that resulted in settlement significantly increased from the Pre-COVID Summary 
Possession mediation program, going from 47 percent to 87 percent. More significantly, the number of 
tenants that remained in place as ongoing tenants, increased from 11 percent to 85 percent.

For the landlords, the agreements reached through Act 57 mediations often meant they were able to 
recover back rent and avoid the costly processes of litigating an eviction action and finding new tenants. 
For families who were able to remain in their homes as a result of Act 57 and the availability of rent relief, 
they avoided forced moves that often result in the loss of security deposits and belongings, a change in 
schools, a longer commute to work, a negative mark on their rental history, and for some, homelessness.

Not only did the program promote housing stability for landlords and tenants, but the program effectively 
reduced the load on the Judiciary by eliminating the need to file any summary possession action for each 
case that settled. 

The Act 57 program diverted from the court system as many as 1,201 eviction cases—the total number 
of Act 57 cases that were settled during the program’s duration. Doing so undoubtedly reduced strain on 
judges’ calendars, filing clerks, workers who assist litigants when they get to court, and everyone else 
involved in the process of a case making its way through the system. 

Further study on these costs is necessary, but it is reasonable to anticipate that the costs of mediation under 
an Act 57-like program—estimated at $250 to open each case with an additional $250 for every mediation 
session conducted (e.g. $350,000 to open 1,000 cases and hold 500 mediations)—is likely to be either 
comparable to or lower than the costs to the Judiciary if the cases were to go through the court process.  

While it is not feasible to determine with certainty from the data available for this study which of the 
various factors from the Act 57 program had the greatest impact on the starkly different outcomes between 
Act 57 mediations and the Pre-COVID Summary Possession and Summary Possession During COVID 
mediations, when examined along with participant perceptions gathered from the interviews conducted 
for the study, it is reasonable to conclude that: 

•  Conducting mediation pre-litigation is likely to have had a significant impact on settlement and 

whether a tenant remains as an ongoing tenant.

26 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

 
 
  
CONCLUSION

•  Providing adequate time to mediate and contracting paid mediators, as opposed to relying on 
volunteer mediators, also appears to have increased the likelihood of successful mediation.

•  The availability of rental relief was key to ensuring housing stability, but rental relief alone is 

insufficient.

•  The use of video conferencing software in lieu of requiring a personal appearance in court provides 

tenants with more comfort and confidence by placing parties on a more even field, even if the landlord 
is represented by counsel.

MCOP plans to continue to provide pre-litigation mediation services to landlords and tenants at no cost, as 
budget permits. However, in absence of a continuing requirement that landlords provide tenants with an 
opportunity to mediate before proceeding with a summary possession lawsuit, it is likely that pre-litigation 
mediation will not be used often. 

As of publication, no additional funding has been allocated to allow MCOP to continue to use the paid 
professional mediators that were used for the Act 57 program. Nor has funding been available to cover the 
expense of the program administrative support that allowed MCOP to reach out to tenants and schedule 
mediations relatively quickly (usually within 15 days of receiving the notice from the landlord). 

While the volume of eviction-related mediations is likely to be below the levels experienced in the 
aftermath of widespread job loss due to the pandemic, elements of the Act 57 program that have proved 
to be so effective at maintaining housing stability for landlords and tenants could be incorporated into 
permanent process changes, including the following recommendations: 

1.  Require landlords to provide notice of an opportunity to mediate before being able to file a Summary 

Possession Lawsuit and require participation if the tenant requests mediation. 

2.  Provide funding to The Mediation Center of the Pacific to hire independent mediators. 

3.  Provide funding to The Mediation Center of the Pacific for administration of the cases. 

4.  Provide for up to 1.5-hour mediation sessions with the possibility of one additional session to follow up 

on how an agreement is working or to renegotiate the terms of the agreement. 

5.  Allow parties to participate in mediation via video conferencing.

Additionally, access to emergency rental assistance was an important factor in the success of many of the 
mediations. Concurrent with updates to the existing mediation program for landlord/tenant disputes, 
access to rental assistance funds should be made permanent.

EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION • 27

ENDNOTES

Office of the Governor, “Fifth Supplementary 

1. 
Emergency Proclamation for COVID-19,” State of 
Hawaiʻi, April 16, 2020, https://governor.hawaii.
gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/2004088-ATG_
Fifth-Supplementary-Proclamation-for-COVID-19-
distribution-signed.pdf

One Oʻahu, “Rental & Utility Relief Program 

2. 
Frequently Asked Questions,” City & County of 
Honolulu, Updated September 28, 2022, https://
www.oneoahu.org/renthelp/#faqs

Resolution Strategies,” Mitchell Hamline Law Journal 
of Public Policy and Practice, 41;3, p 129, 2020, 
https://open.mitchellhamline.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=1035&context=policypractice

Original Source: Bezdek, Barbara, “Silence in the 
Court: Participation and Subordination of Poor 
Tenants’ Voices in Legal Process,” Hofstra Law 
Review, 20;3, 1992, https://scholarlycommons.
law.hofstra.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&article=1742&context=hlr 

One Oʻahu, “Rental and Utility Relief 
3. 
Program Frequently Asked Questions,” City 
& County of Honolulu, Updated June 30, 
2022, https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/5e69ad07bb2a7750ffc9a8ed/t/62b
e5f333b3efc0c11779b91/1656643380231/
Public+Version+RURP+FAQ+6-30-2022.docx.pdf

4. 
The Mediation Center of the Pacific, “Eviction 
Mediation Program Related to Act 57,” 2021, https://
www.mediatehawaii.org/semp

5. 
Act 57 (H.B. 1376, H.D. 2, S.D. 2, C.D. I), 
Session Laws of Hawaiʻi 2021, Related to the 
Landlord-Tenant Code, https://www.capitol.hawaii.
gov/session2021/bills/GM1157_.PDF 

6. 

ibid

Urban Institute, “Getting Landlords and 

7. 
Tenants to Talk: The Use of Mediation in Eviction,” 
p 2, April, 2020, https://www.urban.org/sites/
default/files/publication/101991/getting-landlords-
and-tenants-to-talk_3.pdf

8. 
Eisenberg, Deborah Thompson and Ebner, 
Noam, “Disrupting the Eviction Crisis with Conflict 

28 • EVICTION PREVENTION, MEDIATION

9. 

Urban Institute (2020), p 10 

10. 

ibid

11. 

Eisenberg (2020), p 129

12. 

ibid 

13. 

Eisenberg (2020), p 143–144

Boghani, Priyanka, Dan Nolan, and Anthony 
14. 
DeLorenzo, “How Moratoriums & Rental Assistance 
Impacted Evictions in the U.S. During COVID-19,” 
Frontline, July 26, 2022, https://www.pbs.org/
wgbh/frontline/article/how-moratoriums-rental-
assistance-impacted-evictions-in-the-u-s-during-
covid-19/

Luddin, Jennifer, “Eviction filings are up 

15. 
sharply as pandemic rental aid starts to run out,” 
National Public Radio, May 4, 2022, https://www.npr.
org/2022/05/04/1095559147/eviction-filings-are-up-
sharply-as-pandemic-rental-aid-starts-to-run-out

For the mediations in this category that 

16. 
resulted in settlement, we were not able to obtain 
information on whether rent relief was a factor.