Title: Health and Care for People Experiencing Homelessness
Date: unknown
URL: https://hiappleseed.org/publications/health-care-homelessness
PDF: https://hiappleseed.org/s/Health-and-Housing-2_REV_FINAL.pdf
============================================================

January 2022

Good Health Depends on Decent Housing

Health and Care for People 
Experiencing Homelessness

A program of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1180, Honolulu, HI 96813

Author: Beth Giesting, Director

The Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors of this 
report, who believe that good health depends on decent housing, and are working every day 
on solutions for Hawaiʻi: 

AlohaCare, a community-led, non-profit health plan founded in 1994 by Hawaiʻi’s community 
health centers. We are the only statewide health plan solely dedicated to serving residents 
who are eligible for Hawaiʻi’s QUEST Integration (Medicaid) and Medicare programs; and

Hawaiʻi Pacific Health, a not-for-profit health care system of medical centers, clinics, 
physicians and other care providers. Our mission is to create a healthier Hawaiʻi. Anchored 
by our four medical centers—Kapiʻolani Medical Center for Women & Children, Pali Momi 
Medical Center, Straub Medical Center and Wilcox Medical Center—Hawaiʻi Pacific Health 
also includes more than 70 convenient locations statewide.

Copyright © 2022 Hawai‘i Budget & Policy Center. All rights reserved.

The strong link between health and housing is magnified for people experiencing homelessness. 
Living conditions—the stress and conflict of crowded shelters or living on the streets, emotional 
trauma, unsanitary conditions, poor nutrition, sleep deprivation, and violence and sexual 
abuse—contribute to poor mental and physical health. Healthcare costs are particularly high 
for people without shelter and social support because it is often rendered in hospitals and at 
emergency rooms. 

Part Two of our series, Good Health Depends on Decent Housing, reports on how helping people 
who are currently experiencing homelessness with housing and other needs is not only life-
changing, but also saves money.

PART TWO. HEALTH AND CARE FOR PEOPLE 
EXPERIENCING HOMELESSNESS

People who experience homelessness are often in that position 
because family, government services, and society have offered little 
support and few opportunities. Individuals who have been without 
stable housing describe the loss of self-respect and hope, and the 
pain caused by scornful treatment from most of the public. Small 
wonder, then, that the strong link between health and housing is 
magnified for people experiencing homelessness.

HEALTH & HOUSING • 3

HOMELESSNESS

On O‘ahu, 31 percent of people experiencing homelessness are Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, an over-representation of both ethnic 
groupings compared to their overall share of the state population. Above: Hotel Street, Downtown/Chinatown, Honolulu. // Will Caron

POVERTY AND POOR HEALTH go hand in hand, but the living conditions of people experiencing 
homelessness—the stress and conflict of crowded shelters or living on the streets, emotional trauma, 
unsanitary conditions, poor nutrition, sleep deprivation, and violence and sexual abuse—usually make health 
outcomes much worse. 

In addition, diseases may be far advanced before healthcare attention is sought or provided. Once 
diagnosed, compliance with medical recommendations may be impossible due to the uncertainty inherent 
in transitory living arrangements, loss of personal possessions to theft or “sweeps,” and mental illness, 
substance use, and distrust of care providers. These factors together result in a greatly reduced lifespan for a 
person experiencing homelessness.1

The January 2020 Point in Time survey, which collects information from people experiencing homelessness 
as a “snapshot” on a particular day, found that 6,458 Hawai‘i residents were houseless.2 The survey, which is 

4 • HEALTH & HOUSING

HOMELESSNESS

conducted across the country, shows that 45.6 people were experiencing homelessness in Hawai‘i for every 
10,000 residents. This is the third highest rate in the country, putting Hawai‘i well behind Washington, D.C. (90 
people per 10,000), but close to second highest New York (46.9 people per 10,000).3

Hawaiʻi Survey Data 

The Point in Time survey on O‘ahu, conducted by Partners in Care, found that there were 4,448 people 
experiencing homelessness in January 2020.4 Bridging the Gap Hawai‘i found 2,010 individuals and families 
experiencing homelessness in Hawai‘i, Kaua‘i and Maui Counties.5 Among their combined findings: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

24 percent of adults (1,533) indicated they had serious mental health challenges; 

18 percent of adults (1,143) suffered from substance use disorders (the data doesn’t show how many of 
these adults had a “dual diagnosis” of both mental illness and substance use disorders); 

57 adults (1 percent) had an HIV/AIDS diagnosis; and 

1,590 individuals (25 percent) were chronically houseless—that is, they had experienced homelessness 
constantly for a year or more, or were houseless on at least four separate occasions over the past three 
years.

More than 1,100 people surveyed on all islands were children in families, which is troubling on many levels, 
not least being the serious implications for their lifelong health. Compared to their peers who had never 
experienced homelessness, young children who experience homelessness are more likely to have fair to poor 
health, experience developmental delays, be overweight, and be hospitalized. Poor health outcomes affect 
even children who were houseless only prenatally.6

The surveys found that “Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander” made up 31 percent of respondents 
on O‘ahu and 26 percent on neighbor islands. These two groups are over-represented among people 
experiencing homelessness. According to 2019 American Community Survey estimates, Native Hawaiians 
and Pacific Islanders, alone and in combination with at least one other race, make up 25 percent of the state’s 
population. 

Disproportionate Hospital Usage

People experiencing homelessness—particularly those who are chronically homeless—are often frequent 
users of the most expensive level of healthcare: emergency and inpatient services. This can be due to the 
advanced course of a disease by the time treatment is sought, or it can result from higher than average rates 
of mental illness and substance use disorders, among other causes, that lead to frequent ER use. 

Hospitals, which have sophisticated information systems, are in a better position to collect data about patients 
who are experiencing homelessness than many other healthcare sites. In Hawai‘i, hospitals have contributed 

HEALTH & HOUSING • 5

HOMELESSNESS

data to shared databases for more than 25 years, first through the Hawai‘i Health Information Corporation 
(HHIC) and then through the Laulima Data Alliance, a project of the Healthcare Association of Hawai‘i. These two 
databases are the source of the information summarized below. There are notable differences in the average 
number of monthly visits reported by the two data sets. This is likely because HHIC used informal information 
about houseless status based on patient address or provider notes while Laulima included only patients that 
were identified by a “z code,” which is a special diagnostic code that reports factors that influence health status.

Comparison of HHIC vs Laulima Databases

The HHIC report was issued in 2017 and shared 
demographics, utilization and charges for care 
at hospitals in Hawaiʻi that were attributed 
to people experiencing homelessness.7 It’s 
report, covering the period from January 
2010–September 2017, showed the following: 

•  An average of about 1,300 houseless 

patients per month used hospital inpatient 
and emergency department services at 16 
reporting hospitals; 

The Laulima Data Alliance made information 
available to members of the Hawaiʻi Pacific 
Health Bridge to Leadership cohort. The 
cohort summarized key data and provided 
it as a courtesy for this report. The following 
summarized Laulima Data is for the period of 
January 2016–June 2021: 

•  An average of 542 houseless patients 

per month used hospital inpatient and 
emergency department services at 11 
reporting hospitals; 

•  Average monthly charges for care 

amounted to more than $8.5 million;8 

•  No information was available about 

•  Demographically, 47 percent of patients 
were white and 16 percent were Native 
Hawaiian. More than 70 percent were male, 
and nearly 80 percent were between the 
ages of 25–64.

charges; 

•  Patient demographic information was 

nearly identical to that reported by HHIC. 

The Queen’s Health System (QHS) serves a much larger number of patients who are experiencing 
homelessness than other Hawai‘i hospitals. In order to best meet the special needs of these patients, QHS 
collected and used service data to tailor care for them. 

QHS has built the Queen’s Care Coalition (QCC), a team of patient navigators, social workers and nurses 
to work with patients upon discharge to help them find and settle into appropriate housing, and to assist 

6 • HEALTH & HOUSING

HOMELESSNESS

with other needs. QHS continues to provide behavioral as well as physical health care, which also enhances 
housing stability. 

According to information shared with the Hawai‘i Pacific Health Bridge to Leadership group, by comparing 
six months of pre-intervention cost data to six months post-intervention, QHS achieved healthcare savings of 
nearly $5 million for 120 patients due to fewer and shorter hospital stays, and fewer readmissions, emergency 
room visits and ambulance transports. Because the QCC’s services have proven to be so effective, it is noted 
by Med-QUEST as a special Community Integration Services (CIS) provider for super-user and Native Hawaiian 
patients.

Other Successful Interventions

The cost of healthcare for people experiencing homelessness is often much higher than for the general 
population, and is usually covered by public insurers—predominantly Medicaid. For these reasons, Medicaid-
supported intervention programs around the country have been designed to provide supportive housing and 
behavioral health services with the goal of improving health and reducing healthcare costs. 

Reports from these programs show significant successes. A dozen of them, including the Hawaiʻi Pathways 
Project, were cited by the state Med-QUEST Division (MQD) in its application for a demonstration waiver 
to provide similar services. Intervention programs reported reductions in hospital admissions by up to 72 
percent and per-person cost savings of up to $51,000 per year.

Med-QUEST’s Initiatives 

With the approval of its waiver proposal, Med-QUEST and its contracted health plans have embarked on 
an initiative aimed at improving the lives of people experiencing chronic homelessness. The plan focuses 
on permanent supportive housing, a proven strategy for Hawai‘i as demonstrated by the Hawai‘i Pathways 
Project. 

The target group is adults (aged 18 or older) who are chronically houseless, or are at risk for homelessness, 
and have at least one disabling mental or physical illness and/or substance use disorder. Other individuals 
eligible for supportive housing services are frequent users of emergency room and inpatient services.9

According to its approved proposal to the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS),10 MQD 
will start by identifying and assisting individuals who have been incurring the highest healthcare costs, and 
expand to other eligible people over the course of five years. Over the five-year span, the program expects to:

•  Provide permanent supportive housing services to nearly 2,000 people; and 

•  Save more than $25 million in public costs (these savings reflect $42 million less spent for healthcare as 

$17 million more is spent for supportive housing services). 

The costs of room and board are not a benefit paid for by Med-QUEST; rather, those costs are to be covered 

HEALTH & HOUSING • 7

HOMELESSNESS

by housing vouchers and rent paid by beneficiaries of up to 30 percent of their incomes. Supportive housing 
service costs will be paid for using the $25 million in savings projected over five years.

Med-QUEST itself and the health plans with which it contracts—AlohaCare, the Hawai‘i Medical Service 
Association (HMSA), Kaiser-Permanente, ‘Ohana Health Plan/Centene, and UnitedHealthcare—will provide or 
pay for the housing-related services outlined in the box on page 9.11

Health plans and state mental health agencies also provide a full range of clinical and therapeutic services for 
individuals with mental illnesses and other behavioral health needs, such as substance use disorders.

Home and Community Based Services 

In addition, new benefits were added to Home and Community Based Services (HCBS) for individuals 
who either currently qualify for institutional-level care, or are likely to need such care in the near future if 
preventive services are not provided. HCBS benefits are aimed at giving the client the option to receive care at 
home rather than in a care facility, with “home” defined as being in the community and offering the individual 
privacy, dignity, and personal choice, among other things. Under HCBS, health plans working with Med-
QUEST are expected to provide adult day care and day health, meals and personal assistance, among other 
services designed to prevent institutional care. 

HCBS offers additional opportunities to meet the needs of people experiencing homelessness and connect 
them to permanent housing and needed services. These include psychosocial rehabilitation, social supports, 
and “habilitative services,” which “assist individuals in acquiring, retaining, or improving the self-help, 

8 • HEALTH & HOUSING

HOMELESSNESS

Housing-Related Services Covered by Med-QUEST and Contractors

Screening, assessment, service planning: 

•  Referral to Department of Health Program 

•  Outreach to and screen and assess all 

clients for housing instability and other 
social and economic needs to determine 
eligibility. 

•  Where needed, develop an individualized 
housing support plan that addresses pre-
tenancy and tenancy. 

• 

For clients who are elderly or disabled 
by physical or mental illnesses, help 
with transitions from institutions such as 
hospitals, correctional facilities, or long-
term care, to housing. 

Pre-tenancy assistance and community 
integration for clients who are experiencing 
chronic homelessness and a disabling mental 
or physical illness and/or substance use 
disorder: 

•  Help with finding, applying for, and 

supports, as appropriate. 

•  Safety and social risk factors supports. 

•  Housing readiness supports. 

•  Case management to follow-up on missed 

appointments. 

•  Employment and financial assistance 

supports.

Tenancy support to maintain housing:

•  Help clients understand and accept tenant 

responsibilities. 

•  Teach dispute resolution with landlords 

and neighbors.

• 

If appropriate, participate in job skills and 
employment search activities.

securing housing. 

•  Coordinate healthcare and other needed 

services.

•  Medical reengagement and care 

coordination.

socialization, and adaptive skills necessary to reside successfully in home and community-based settings.”12 
In addition to more traditional medical care and equipment, the list of HCBS services covers a broadly-
interpreted array of interventions aimed at locating and maintaining housing, including counseling and 
education, home location assistance, moving assistance, home maintenance, home-delivered meals, non-
medical transportation, and personal assistance.

HEALTH & HOUSING • 9

 
HOMELESSNESS

The Hawaiʻi Pathways Project

The Hawai‘i Department of Health Alcohol and Drug Abuse Division launched the state’s first “Pathways 
to Housing” project in 2013. This evidence-based approach connects individuals experiencing chronic 
homelessness to permanent housing, and then addresses their mental health, substance use, medical, and 
social and economic needs.13  The program was supported by a federal grant from the Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).

Services were provided on O‘ahu by Helping Hands Hawai‘i and Catholic Charities Hawai‘i, with program 
evaluation carried out by the University of Hawai‘i Center on the Family. The program ran from 2014–2017 
and served 134 clients who suffered from a substance use disorder, mental illness, or both. Most had been 
unsheltered at the beginning of the project and half had been homeless for six or more years. 

Clients were placed in private housing units across O‘ahu through existing Permanent Supportive Housing 
Programs. Clients paid 30 percent of their incomes for rent with housing vouchers typically covering the 
balance. Pathways staff delivered housing support services, case management, treatment, peer support, 
health education, and employment services where and when needed.

Results

The program was transformative for the clients it served. Ninety percent of program participants had retained 
housing for an average of 13.9 months by the time the grant ended. Client-reported health status improved, 
including decreases in psychological and emotional challenges, alcohol and drug use, and the health and 
social consequences of substance use. 

On a monthly basis, the cost of housing averaged $1,100 per client, while supportive services cost $850 per 
client. Healthcare costs decreased by 76 percent. ER and inpatient use dropped and so did involvement in 
the criminal justice system. Net savings amounted to $4,257 per month per client—more than $51,000 per 
program participant, annually. 

The Hawai‘i Pathways project demonstrated the value of housing and of supporting people experiencing 
long-term homelessness with accompanying substance use disorders and/or serious mental illness. It 
provided practical experience to identify system strengths and address weaknesses, and it helped inform 
Med-QUEST’s housing assistance waiver demonstration proposal to the federal Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS).

Challenges

Two significant challenges limited the program’s ability to offer services to all the people eligible. One was 
finding landlords willing to accept program participants and housing vouchers. The other was the shortage of 
housing vouchers needed to pay the rent. Housing voucher scarcity limited the number of participants and 
delayed placement for some of those who were served (clients waited an average of 8.5 months to move into 
permanent housing).

10 • HEALTH & HOUSING

HOMELESSNESS

There is no doubt that providing housing 
to all people who are experiencing 
homelessness is good for the individuals 
affected, and it is clear that doing so also 
reduces publicly-supported healthcare 
and other costs. 

The savings anticipated by Med-QUEST’s 
five-year demonstration project did not 
include an estimate for housing costs. 
However, another study estimated the 
full costs to provide housing as well 
as healthcare and support services in 
Hawai‘i, and the evaluation of the Hawai‘i 
Pathways Project also captured full costs. 
As shown in Table 1, the potential for cost 
savings over 10 years is considerable.

Projections over 10 Years

Corporation for Supportive Housing 
(CSH) Study (2017):14 1,807 households, 
largely individual, O‘ahu only.

Pathways Evaluation (2017):15
134 participants, O‘ahu only.

Without Permanent Supportive Housing

1. Healthcare Costs

$2.29 billion

$170 million

With Permanent Supportive Housing

2. Housing Costs (Development, Rehab, 
Vouchers, Subsidies)

3. Permanent Supportive Housing 
Services

4. Healthcare Costs

5. Total Costs with Permanent 
Supportive Housing (Lines 2–4)

$533 million

$129 million

$1.30 billion

$1.96 billion

Savings (Line 1 minus Line 5)

$334 million

Savings per client/unit

$184,737

$18 million

$14 million

$96 million

$128 million

$42 million

$316,800

Table 1. Med-QUEST’s estimate of savings through permanent supportive housing is supported by another Hawai‘i-specific study and the 
evaluation of the Hawai‘i Pathways project. They show expected net savings over 10 years that range from $185,000–317,000 per client.

HEALTH & HOUSING • 11

HOMELESSNESS

Help for People Experiencing Homelessness

Homelessness and deep poverty are disturbing symptoms of growing economic inequality, long-standing 
systemic racism, and inadequate investment in human needs. While this report does not address those larger 
issues, it does outline ways to strengthen the continuum of services aimed at preventing people from losing 
their homes and restoring stable housing to those who are experiencing homelessness. These resources 
not only support housing but provide health services and other interventions that may be needed to ensure 
individuals and families can maintain stable housing.

Housing Vouchers 

A primary cause of homelessness is the lack of homes affordable to the lowest-income households. Housing 
vouchers are among the best resources available to reduce the cost of rent to maintain and regain housing. 

In August 2021, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) provided vouchers sufficient 
to pay for nearly 13,500 housing units, about 11,500 (85 percent) of which were in use.16 Housing vouchers, 
which are administered by state and county agencies, are targeted to different needs which are covered in the 
box on page 13.

Targeted subsidies like housing vouchers are essential to counteract the acute shortage of housing units 
available to low-income renters. But vouchers are largely used in the private housing market where their 
usefulness is hampered by landlord discrimination. 

Although there are no federal laws that prohibit housing discrimination by source of income, a number of 
states and local jurisdictions have passed anti-discrimination laws to good effect.17 Hawai‘i should enact an 
anti-discrimination law similar to bills introduced at the state legislature in 2021 as Senate Bills 1135 and 36, 
and House Bill 981.

Prevention and Rapid Rehousing 

While a quarter of the people counted in the Point in Time survey were experiencing chronic homelessness, 
the remaining 75 percent of people without stable housing had less complex needs. Homelessness 
prevention programs help households that are otherwise likely to lose stable housing with financial 
assistance and other supportive services that may be necessary. 

Rapid rehousing programs aim to quickly restore permanent housing to families who have recently lost their 
homes. Financial and other supportive services may be offered briefly or up to 24 months. Both prevention 
and rapid rehousing are good investments because they avert the costly long-term consequences of 
prolonged homelessness.

12 • HEALTH & HOUSING

HOMELESSNESS

Comparison of Housing Vouchers and their Target Beneficiaries

Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers 
subsidize the cost of housing for low-
income individuals and families, usually 
so that the household pays no more 
than 30 percent of its income in rent. 
Hawaiʻi gets 10,400 of these vouchers 
for 114,000 eligible households.18

Emergency Housing Vouchers were 
funded in the American Rescue Plan 
Act to assist individuals or families 
who are or were recently homeless, 
at risk for homelessness, or are 
fleeing domestic violence or human 
trafficking.19 Hawaiʻi was allocated 
708 of these vouchers, which work 
like Section 8 housing vouchers. 
While federal funding to support 
these vouchers is available through 
September 30, 2030, they must be used 
(that is, leases for housing secured) by 
September 30, 2023. Any vouchers not 
used by that date will be lost.

Special Purpose Housing Choice Vouchers target 
individuals and households with additional needs. 
They include: 

•  Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD-

VASH) vouchers are directed to assist veterans 
experiencing homelessness. Total vouchers: 994. 
Vouchers in use: 786 (79 percent). 

•  Mainstream vouchers assist families that include 
a non-elderly person with disabilities. Total 
vouchers: 340. Vouchers in use: 183 (54 percent). 

•  Non-Elderly Disabled vouchers also assist 

families where a member has disabilities. Total 
vouchers: 175. Vouchers in use: 165 (94 percent). 

• 

Family Unification Program vouchers are 
available to help families avoid out-placement 
of children due to inadequate housing and assist 
young adults between the ages of 18–24 exiting 
the foster care system. Total vouchers: 118. 
Vouchers in use: 72 (61 percent).

Housing First and Permanent Supportive Housing

For individuals experiencing chronic homelessness in tandem with disabling physical, mental, and substance 
use disorders, Housing First and Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) are considered the community 
standard of care. Housing First recognizes that stable housing is needed before an individual can address 
health and economic concerns. It is linked with PSH, which provides tailored supportive services to address 
health and economic needs. The aim of PSH is to support physical and behavioral health recovery and 
provide the tools to maintain stable housing.

HEALTH & HOUSING • 13

HOMELESSNESS

Special Needs Housing

Housing may also be available for people with special needs, for either long or short periods. For instance, 
the federally-funded Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS program provides financial assistance for 
housing as well as case management and other services to support stable housing. Medical respite housing 
addresses the post-acute care needs of individuals released from hospitals who are too ill or frail to recover 
from a physical illness or injury on the streets. This service is usually delivered as short-term residential care 
that combines a safe environment with access to follow-up medical care and other supportive services.

Emergency Shelters

Emergency shelters are part of the continuum of services for people experiencing homelessness. Their 
existence is essential to individuals and families fleeing domestic violence or made homeless by recent 
financial circumstances, but they are just as necessary for helping unsheltered people transition from the 
street to housing. 

Shelters must offer safe respite and have low-barriers to access, such as not requiring identification, 
documentation, or payment. Their function is to be a temporary home while they enroll guests in programs 
that offer services and permanent housing. Hawai‘i needs to maintain the capacity of its shelters, many of 
which need capital repairs after decades of use.

Flexibility and Innovation

The state legislature appropriated ‘Ohana Zones funding in 2018 and 2019 to foster solutions to housing and 
homelessness that encouraged partnership, could be implemented rapidly, and met local circumstances. 
Hawai‘i’s ‘Ohana Zones pilot program uses state or county facilities and/or matches county funds to provide a 
continuum of services. Since its start in 2019, ‘Ohana Zones has served more than 5,000 people. Some of the 
programs launched with ‘Ohana Zones funding include:20

•  Permanent supportive housing, including a project that serves young adults between 18 and 24 and 

another that helps survivors of domestic violence;

•  The development of “tiny homes;”

•  Assessment centers that connect families to housing, enrolls them in public services, and offers mail pick-

up and emergency or transitional shelter;

•  Nontraditional mobile outreach, screening, navigation and hygiene services for unsheltered people;

•  Emergency shelter and stabilization services;

• 

Law-enforcement diversion programs that connect people with low-level offenses with services instead of 
issuing citations.

14 • HEALTH & HOUSING

 
HOMELESSNESS

Affordable Housing is the Key to Ending Homelessness

A number of programs seek to reduce the 
number of people experiencing homelessness 
and diminish the effects of unstable housing. 
They are much-needed. Yet the inescapable 
reason that most people experience 
homelessness is the lack of affordable homes. 

This was demonstrated by a 10-year initiative 
to end homelessness in Salt Lake City, Utah, 
which began in 2005. Over that decade, the 
number of housing units built or retrofitted for 
permanent supportive housing nearly doubled, 
giving the city the capacity to accommodate 
more than 2,400 people by 2015.21 Still, the 
overall population of people experiencing 
homelessness in 2020 totaled nearly 2,000—

just 180 fewer than were counted in 2005. In 
addition, the subpopulation of individuals 
who are chronically homeless increased by 18 
percent, from 369 to 436.22 

While some Salt Lake officials blame the 
apparent lack of success on changes in counting 
procedures, others concede that in the city’s 
increasingly competitive housing market, the 
problem is the availability of housing that 
working people can afford. 

We, too, conclude that Hawaiʻi will not succeed 
in ending homelessness without ensuring that 
working families, kūpuna, and people with 
special needs have housing they can afford. 

Endnotes

Maness, David L. and Muneeza Khan, “Care of the Homeless: An 

1. 
Overview,” American Family Physician 89(8): 634–640, April 2014, https://
www.aafp.org/afp/2014/0415/p634.html

Homeless Point-In-Time Count,” Bridging the Gap, May 2020, https://
www.btghawaii.org/media/uploads/2020_btg_pit_count_report_
final_-_5.6.20.pdf

State of Hawai‘i Homelessness Initiative, “2020 Point in 

2. 
Time Count,” Hawai‘i State Department of Human Services, https://
homelessness.hawaii.gov/point-in-time-count

3. 
“State of Homelessness: 2021 Edition,” National Alliance to End 
Homelessness, https://endhomelessness.org/homelessness-in-america/
homelessness-statistics/state-of-homelessness-2021

4. 
“2020 O‘ahu Point in Time Count Comprehensive 
Report,” Partners in Care, https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/5db76f1aadbeba4fb77280f1/t/5efa984a8ae4f77486350
9e8/1593481306526/PIC+2020+PIT+Count+Report+Final.pdf

6. 
Sandel, Megan, Richard Sheward and Lisa Sturtevant, 
“Compounding Stress: The Timing and Duration Effects of Homelessness 
on Children’s Health,” Center for Housing Policy, June 2015, http://media.
wix.com/ugd/19cfbe_07b13c8e56a14337a316e2e991aa0bf7.pdf
“Homelessness and the Impact on Healthcare: An Overview,” 
7. 
7. 
Hawai‘i Health Information Corporation, Accessed October 5, 
2021, https://hhic.org/downloads/category/topics/patient-populations/
homelessness

8. 
Charges are typically higher than the costs associated with the 
care provided and are also more than Medicaid (Med-QUEST), Medicare 
or private insurers would reimburse for a service.

5. 

Ka Mana O Na Helu, “We Count Because Everyone Matters: 

Continued on next page.

HEALTH & HOUSING • 15

HOMELESSNESS

Endnotes Continued

“Amendment to the Hawai‘i QUEST Expanded Medicaid 

9. 
Section 1115 Demonstration (11-W-00001/9),” Hawai‘i State Department 
of Human Services, August 29, 2017, https://www.medicaid.gov/
Medicaid-CHIP-Program-Information/By-Topics/Waivers/1115/
downloads/hi/hi-quest-expanded-pa.pdf

United States Office of Public & Indian Housing, “Housing 

16 
Choice Voucher Program Dashboard,” U.S. Department of Housing and 
Urban Development, Accessed October 27, 2021, 
https://app.powerbigov.us/view?r=eyJrIjoiM2Y2OTQ2MTAtODVkNC00Y
mM2LThhOWEtZWY4MGU5YWFmZDFmIiwidCI6IjYxNTUyNGM1LTIyZTkt
NGJjZC1hODkzLTExODBhNTNmYzdiMiJ9

10. 

Ibid

“Community Integration Services (CIS) Implementation 

11. 
Guidelines, Overview, Member Eligibility, Service delivery, Coordination 
& Reimbursement,” Med-QUEST Memo Number QI-2105, CCS-2102, April 
2021, https://medquest.hawaii.gov/en/plans-providers/provider-memo.
html

Wilkins, Carol, Martha Burt and Gretchen Locke, “A Primer 

12 
on Using Medicaid for People Experiencing Chronic Homelessness and 
Tenants in Permanent Supportive Housing,” U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services, July 2014, https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/
migrated_legacy_files//44471/PSHprimer.pdf

Bell, Alison, Barbara Sard and Becky Koepnick, “Prohibiting 

17 
Discrimination Against Renters Using Housing Vouchers Improves 
Results,” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, December 20, 2018, 
https://www.cbpp.org/research/housing/prohibiting-discrimination-
against-renters-using-housing-vouchers-improves-results 

18 
Reina, Vincent, Claudia Aiken and Jenna Epstein, “Exploring a 
Universal Housing Voucher,” The Housing Initiative at Penn, https://www.
housinginitiative.org/universal-voucher.html

“American Rescue Plan Act,” Public Law 117-2, Section 3202, 

19 
https://www.congress.gov/117/plaws/publ2/PLAW-117publ2.pdf

Yuan, S., J. Azuma and K. Gauci, “Hawai‘i Pathways Project 

13. 
Final Report, August 2014–September 2017,” University of Hawai‘i Center 
on the Family, https://uhfamily.hawaii.edu/sites/uhfamily.hawaii.edu/
files/publications/PathwaysProjectFinalReport.pdf 

State of Hawai‘i Homelessness Initiative, “Key Focus Areas/

20 
‘Ohana Zones,” Hawai‘i State Department of Human Services, accessed 
December 9, 2021, https://homelessness.hawaii.gov/ohana-zones

14 
Lyons, Heather, “Housing Projections & Financial Modeling 
for Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) on O‘ahu,” Corporation for 
Supportive Housing, 2017, https://homelessness.hawaii.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2019/03/HI-ProjectionsFinancial-Modeling.-Focus-on-PSH-only.
pdf

Yuan, S., J. Azuma and K. Gauci, “Hawai‘i Pathways Project 

15 
Final Report, August 2014–September 2017,” University of Hawai‘i Center 
on the Family, https://uhfamily.hawaii.edu/sites/uhfamily.hawaii.edu/
files/publications/PathwaysProjectFinalReport.pdf 

16 • HEALTH & HOUSING

Rogers, Bethany, “Utah was once lauded for solving 

21 
homelessness—the reality was far more complicated,” The Salt Lake 
Tribune, May 11, 2020, https://www.sltrib.com/news/politics/2020/05/11/
utah-was-once-lauded

HUD Exchange, “Continuum of Care Homeless Populations 

22 
and Subpopulations Reports,” United States Department of Housing and 
Urban Development, https://www.hudexchange.info/programs/coc/coc-
homeless-populations-and-subpopulations-reports