Title: Hawaiʻi SNAP
Date: unknown
URL: https://hiappleseed.org/publications/hawaii-snap
PDF: https://hiappleseed.org/s/SNAP-Needs-Report_FINAL.pdf
============================================================

H AWA IʻI   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

JANUARY 2023

HAWAIʻI SNAP

Challenges and Opportunities for Improving 
Food Security for Hawaiʻi Residents

H AWA IʻI   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

Authors: Daniela Spoto, Jordan Smith, Devin Thomas
Images via: iStock, Will Caron

Hawaiʻi Appleseed envisions a Hawaiʻi that puts its people first—a Hawaiʻi where everyone can meet 
their basic needs while living happy, healthy and creative lives. We advocate for economic justice for 
and with Hawaiʻi’s people.

This report was made possible by:
Nourishing Neighbors, a program of Albertsons Companies Foundation
No Kid Hungry, a program of Share Our Strength

No Kid Hungry Hawaiʻi is a public-private coalition working to end childhood hunger. The partnership 
between Share Our Strength and Hawaiʻi Appleseed is ending childhood hunger in Hawaiʻi by ensuring 
kids get the food they need.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction

SNAP in Hawaiʻi: Key Recommendations

Snapshot: Hawaiʻi’s SNAP Population

Reaching Eligible Populations
Age Distribution of SNAP Users
Ethnic Composition

Why We Need SNAP 

Hawaiʻi’s High Cost of Living
Hard Choices
Diet Quality & Health Concerns 

Application and Recertification: 
The Client Experience

3

4

6

6
7
8

10

10
11
12

13

Language Access and Readability
Documentation Requirements
Recertification and Churn
Profile 

Challenges and Opportunities

Improve Data Access
Expand Nutrition Incentives
Expand Program Eligibility & Participation
Improve Efficiency & Capacity
Profile 

Methodology

Endnotes

14
15
15
16

17

18
19
21
29
34

35

37

Copyright © 2022 Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice. All rights reserved. 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1180, Honolulu, HI 96813

2 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

INTRODUCTION

The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP) is one of the federal government’s most 
important and effective anti-hunger programs, helping 
more than 195,000 Hawaiʻi residents purchase food.1 
SNAP provides recipients with a monthly benefit 
that they can use to purchase food items (excluding 
alcohol and hot meals) from food retail outlets such as 
grocery stores, farmers markets and food hubs. 

To ensure Hawaiʻi residents have access to the food 
they need to survive and thrive, it is important to ensure 
our state is making the most of the SNAP program. The 
challenge to do so increased with the arrival of the 
pandemic as both need and SNAP usage grew. 

In October of 2019, 79,960 households in Hawaiʻi 
received SNAP. By May of the following year, this 
number had risen sharply to 96,580. The level of SNAP 
participation during the pandemic peaked at 112,461 
in August of 2021, but participation rates in 2022 are 
still higher than rates before the pandemic.2

The purpose of this report is to attempt to capture a 
snapshot in time of how well the program is adjusting to 
this spike in need by gathering feedback from recipients, 

outreach providers, and eligibility workers at the state 
Department of Human Services (DHS) in Hawaiʻi. 

With this data, we identify the most important 
challenges and opportunities facing SNAP and 
recommend solutions that can be implemented by 
advocates, providers, policymakers, and administrators. 

This report is separated into three sections: 

• 

• 

• 

First we examine the public data on Hawaiʻi’s SNAP 
population, including statistics on the age and 
ethnicity of the program’s participants.  

Second, we convey the experiences reported by 
SNAP recipients during the interview process.  

Finally, we highlight a number of challenges and 
opportunities that arose during our discussions with 
service providers, SNAP recipients, and DHS staff.  

It is our hope that the recommendations presented 
herein will be a guide for administrators, providers, and 
advocates wishing to ensure that SNAP is conveniently 
accessible to all eligible Hawaiʻi residents. 

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 3

SNAP IN HAWAIʻI: KEY 
RECOMMENDATIONS

Hawaiʻi Appleseed makes the following recommendations for improving access, 
timeliness, and efficiency.

IMPROVING DATA ACCESS

1.  Expand the public’s access to SNAP enrollment data through the creation of a data 

request portal monitored by the state office. 

2.  Provide annual county-level reports on the DHS website with statistics on 
participation and benefits distributed, broken down by ethnicity, age, and 
citizenship status.

EXPANDING NUTRITION INCENTIVES

1.  Acquire $3 million in state and/or county matching funds for Hawaiʻi’s 2023 Gus 

Schumacher Nutrition Incentive Program (GusNIP) application, which would cover 
expansion to all Foodland stores statewide. 

2.  Advocate for sustained federal funding for GusNIP through the 2023 Farm Bill and the 

American Rescue Plan.  

3.  Expand signage and in-store marketing for nutrition incentives.

4 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

EXPANDING PROGRAM ELIGIBILITY 

1.  Advocate for higher SNAP eligibility income thresholds at the federal level.  

2.  Support the Biden Administration’s efforts to expand eligibility for college students and 

other underserved groups.  

3.  Pass state legislation to remove the partial restriction on individuals with felony 

drug convictions. 

4.  Expand eligibility to Compact of Free Association (COFA) residents.  

5.  Prepare for economic changes that would result in mass benefits cliffs. Providers 

and advocates should work closely with DHS and other agencies to identify looming 
changes—such as loss of federal aid, minimum wage increases, or a cost of living 
increase—that could lead to abrupt loss of benefits for large swaths of SNAP recipients. 

6. 

Implement the Elderly Simplified Application Project (ESAP) to facilitate enrollment 
and reduce churn among Hawaiʻi’s senior population. 

7.  Maximize deductions, in particular for medical and dependent care.  

8.  Replace the Thrifty Food Plan with the Low-Cost Food Plan.

IMPROVING EFFICIENCY & CAPACITY

1. 

Improve line staff retention by providing incentives and advancement opportunities.  

2.  Expedite the Integrated Benefits Eligibility System rollout.  

3.  Connect the SNAP and the Women, Infants and Children program eligibility systems. 

4.  Create a new business process engineering manager position at Benefit, 

Employment & Support Services Division (BESSD) of the Hawaiʻi State Department 
of Human Services (DHS) to oversee and update processing center operations.  

5.  Allocate increased funding for contracted outreach providers, tied to expanding 
outreach to difficult-to-reach populations such as those in unstable housing.  

6.  Resume and expand DHS’ outreach efforts by adding a branch-level outreach 

manager position.  

7.  Facilitate quarterly outreach convenings, with a structured agenda that allows 

sharing but also specifically identifies needs and opportunities.

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 5

SNAPSHOT: HAWAIʻI’S 
SNAP POPULATION

REACHING ELIGIBLE POPULATIONS

Figure 1. Hawaiʻi consistently performs about the same as the national rate for reaching eligible populations.3

83%

83%

84%

83%
83%

85%

84%

84%

84%

88%

82%

100%

85%

75%

75%

50%

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Hawaiʻi

National

Figure 1. Going back to 2013, Hawaiʻi has been on-par with the national average for reaching eligible populations 
with SNAP. However, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has a three to four year lag on reporting 
this measure, so it remains to be seen whether Hawaiʻi was able to retain this performance through the pandemic. 
The most recent data (2018) tells us that Hawaiʻi was reaching 88 percent of its eligible population, compared to a 
national rate of 82 percent.4

6 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

AGE DISTRIBUTION OF SNAP USERS

Figure 2. Age distribution of Hawaiʻi SNAP recipients, pre- and post-pandemic5

0–4 Years

5–17 Years

18–59 Years

60+ Years

)
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T
(

s
l
a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

I

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

80

60

40

20

0

64

63

58

35

21

30

40

15

Pre-Pandemic: 
Oct. 2019–Feb. 2020 (N=149,000)

Early Pandemic Period: June 
2020–Sept. 2020 (N=180,000)

Age Distribution of Individuals

Figure 2. Prior to the pandemic, adults over the age of 60 made up about 20 percent of all SNAP users in Hawaiʻi. 
In the early stages of the pandemic, this proportion jumped to one in three–an overall 93 percent increase in the 
total number of seniors receiving SNAP.

“PRE-PANDEMIC, HAWAIʻI SNAP WAS REACHING 59% OF ELIGIBLE SENIORS, 
COMPARED WITH ONLY 44% SERVED NATIONALLY.”

Historically and nationwide, we know that seniors 
participate in SNAP at much lower rates than other 
age groups, for reasons outlined in our prior report, 
“Feeding Our Kūpuna” (2020).6 The most recent 
data (from 2018; pre-pandemic), shows that Hawaiʻi 

reaches 59 percent of eligible seniors (compared with 
only 44 percent nationally).7 However, we are unable 
to say whether the jump in participation in the early 
pandemic days was from seniors that were previously 
eligible or newly eligible.

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 7

 
 
 
SNAPSHOT

ETHNIC COMPOSITION

Figure 3. Proportion of total Hawaiʻi households using SNAP by race/ethnicity8, 9

White Alone

Black Alone

9.6%

8.3%

Filipino Alone

Japanese Alone

Other Asian Alone10

15.8%

3.4%

11.8%

Native Hawaiian Alone11

28.4%

Other Paciﬁc Islander Alone12

38.4%

Some Other

18.2%

Two or More

17.9%

0

50,000

100,000

150,000

200,000

SNAP Households

Total Hawaiʻi Households

In total, 12.6 percent of Hawaiʻi’s households receive 
SNAP benefits. However, the percentages of each 
ethnicity that participate in SNAP vary considerably. In 
particular, Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander 
households have higher SNAP participation rates than 
other ethnic groups in Hawaiʻi.

NATIVE HAWAIIANS

and the illegal overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom, 
Native Hawaiians lost considerable access to their 
native lands and have been unable to practice their 
traditional agriculture and way of life as they had 
before.13 The consequences of these events continue 
to manifest in significant disparities in wealth and 
economic security relative to other ethnic groups. 
These disparities show up in SNAP participation rates 
as well.

While Native Hawaiians once nurtured prosperous, 
self-sufficient food systems, following colonization 

According to state-level data, single-race Native 

8 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

SNAPSHOT

Hawaiian households comprise 6.3 percent of Hawaiʻi’s 
households, and 28.4 percent of these households 
participate in SNAP.14 In addition, after factoring in 
mixed-race individuals, 23.7 percent of Native Hawaiian 
(alone or in combination with other races) households 
receive SNAP benefits. This contrasts sharply with the 
data for single-race Japanese households, of which 
only 3.4 percent participate in SNAP.

OTHER PACIFIC ISLANDERS

Other Pacific Islanders living in Hawaiʻi include 
non-Hawaiian Polynesians, Micronesians and 
Melanesians. The “Polynesian” subcategory includes 
Samoans, Tongans, Fijians, and many others, while 

the Micronesian population predominantly consists 
of citizens from three nations that are part of the 
Compact of Free Association (COFA): The Marshall 
Islands, Palau, and the Federated States of Micronesia. 

As shown in Figure 3, Pacific Islanders make up 
about 2.2 percent of Hawaiʻi’s households, and 
38.4 percent of these households are enrolled in 
SNAP. The reasons for this disproportionate SNAP 
participation rate are rooted in similar, but different, 
historical inequities than those of Native Hawaiians. 
One major root cause is U.S. militarization of these 
island nations, which has made some sections of 
land uninhabitable and led to health problems and 
displacement of indigenous food systems.

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 9

WHY WE NEED SNAP

This section examines some of the experiences recounted by interviewees who 
have received SNAP. These themes and stories underline the importance of SNAP, 
demonstrating that it can be a crucial lifeline to working families with low incomes.

HAWAIʻI’S HIGH COST OF LIVING

“FIVE OUT OF THE SIX RECIPIENTS WE INTERVIEWED WHO WERE UNDER THE AGE 
OF 40 SAID THEY WERE CONSIDERING MOVING TO THE CONTINENTAL U.S. FOR A 
LOWER COST OF LIVING.”

In 2020, Hawaiʻi continued to have the highest cost of 
living in the United States, making it more difficult for 
working families to get by.15 All of the interviewees—
from DHS eligibility workers to SNAP recipients—
commented on how expensive it is to live in Hawaiʻi.

enough job to where I don’t need SNAP. Even if I 
have to move to the mainland for a smaller living 
wage, a smaller cost of living. I don’t want to have 
to depend on SNAP…Right now it’s my only choice 
because Hawaiʻi is so expensive.”

This high cost of living has been driven by many 
issues, including the lack of affordable housing, high 
costs of energy, and a heavy reliance on imported 
goods. Consequently, Hawaiʻi has seen rising levels 
of outmigration in recent years.16 In fact, five out of 
the six recipients we interviewed who were under the 
age of 40 said they were considering moving to the 
continental U.S. for a lower cost of living.

“I’m hoping to buy one of my Hawaiian Homelands 
houses here before I leave, but I highly doubt it. 
Everyone’s leaving, unless you live in low-income 
housing or Hawaiian Homelands.”

“Honestly, my hope for the future is to get a good 

Several of the service providers mentioned unique 
challenges in reaching seniors with SNAP. Many are no 
longer able to work full-time, and are heavily affected 
by the high cost of living in Hawaiʻi. 

“That’s why I wanted to go into those senior places. 
’Cause just by chance, I know they would qualify.”

With these challenging circumstances in mind, the 
recipients we interviewed described SNAP as being 
a “blessing,” with many of them acknowledging that 
they would not be able to pay their bills on time 
without it. In line with the purpose of the program, 
SNAP has an enormous impact on recipients’ ability to 
purchase nutritious food.

10 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

HARD CHOICES 

Figure 4. Household SNAP Participation, Hawaiʻi (January 2019–May 2022)17, 18

125,000

100,000

75,000

50,000

25,000

0

l

s
d
o
h
e
s
u
o
H

Due to a partial government shutdown, 
most of the allotted SNAP beneﬁts for 
February of 2019 were issued in January. 
Thus, the decline in SNAP participation was 
not as severe as the graph might suggest.

Jan. 2019

Jan. 2020

Jan. 2021

Jan. 2022

Since the start of the pandemic, widespread 
unemployment and the rising cost of living have also 
led to increased food insecurity throughout Hawaiʻi. 

assistance.20 These numbers correspond to the 
increases in SNAP enrollment over that period.

At the beginning of 2022, 9.4 percent of adults lived in 
households that did not have enough food to eat over 
the past week, climbing to 13.8 percent by the last 
week of July, 2022.19 

SNAP recipients were grateful for the temporary 
boost in their benefits authorized by the public health 
emergency declaration as a result of the pandemic, 
as it gave them more leeway to eat healthy, full meals 
that they would not be able to afford on their own. 

Aloha United Way’s 211 helpline, which connects 
clients to various assistance programs, recorded 
that 11.1 percent of its callers from June 7, 2019 
through September of 2022 requested food-related 

In 2021, Congress raised all benefits by 15 percent and 
allowed recipients to claim the maximum benefit for 
their household size.21 A recipient clarified that SNAP 
covers families’ basic needs—it is not a “luxury” that 

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 11

WHY WE NEED SNAP

allows them to eat unreasonably expensive meals. 

SNAP. One recipient outlined the dilemma she would 
face if she no longer received her benefits.

“It’s a box of chicken and rice and vegetables, you 
know? It’s not like I’m using it to go out and eat at 
Ruby Tuesday’s. I’m using it to make food at home 
for my family.”

In addition, the majority of recipients said that they 
would not be able to pay all of their bills without 

“I wouldn’t be paying a bill—at least one or two 
bills, to be able to feed everybody. When I wasn’t 
getting [SNAP] EBT, I didn’t pay my electric, and my 
electric went up to almost $1,000. So it is very hard 
for me to put money away, and the kids are always 
so hungry ’cause they’re growing.” 

DIET QUALITY AND HEALTH CONCERNS

For many recipients, SNAP is integral to their dietary 
needs. Without subsidies, nutritious meals are 
typically more expensive than the less nutritious 
alternatives. As a result, lower-income families are 
inclined towards cheaper meal options that are less 
conducive to their overall health.

“It would be very difficult [to get by without SNAP]. 

My doctor would lose her mind because my [blood 
sugar levels] would go crazy. 

“Because healthy food, low in carbs, is more 
expensive. A bag of rice is $15.90, and that would 
last me a whole month. But guess what? I can’t eat 
that. I have to eat certain foods that are way more 
expensive. So the SNAP helps, it does.”

12 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

APPLICATION AND 
RECERTIFICATION: THE 
CLIENT EXPERIENCE

Eligibility Screening

Contact your local processing 
center, SNAP outreach provider, 
or DHS website for eligibility 
screening.

Gather Veriﬁcation 
Documents

This can include bank statements, 
citizenship documents, rental 
lease, and pay stubs.

Submit Application 
(Form 1240)

Applications can be 
completed via a paper or 
online form.

Eligibility Determination

Phone Call Interview

DHS will make a determination within 
30 days. If approved, beneﬁts will be 
added to an EBT card. If denied, a 
notice explaining why will be mailed.

DHS will mail a notice to 
conﬁrm the time and date of the 
phone interview. You must be 
available at that day and time.

While SNAP is one of the most important safety 
net programs we have, it can be a challenge to 
apply, get approved, and remain in the program. 
Applying for SNAP requires many steps and pieces 
of documentation, as shown in the above flow chart. 
After completing the application, the applicant must 
then complete a phone interview with DHS processing 
center line staff to finalize their application.

Although some recipients and eligibility workers we 

interviewed appreciated the interview requirement 
as an opportunity to connect client and staff, others 
shared that it can be both a challenge for DHS staff to 
manage, and for applicants to comply with.

“I eventually got my letter that told me my 
interview for SNAP would be the following day 
at 8:30 a.m. Meaning I had approximately 12 
hours to ensure I could clear my schedule for an 
undetermined amount of time.”

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 13

CLIENT EXPERIENCE

LANGUAGE ACCESS AND READABILITY

In Hawaiʻi, there are a number of populations with 
either a majority or significant minority claiming 
limited English proficiency. 

some English-speaking participants find the phrasing 
of certain questions on the SNAP application to be 
difficult to understand. 

The languages with the lowest percentages of 
speakers who cannot speak English “very well” include 
Korean (60 percent), Vietnamese (69 percent), and 
Mandarin and Cantonese (61.25 percent).22 To support 
access among these and other groups, DHS offers 
interpretation services for SNAP in 17 languages.23

Despite this, it is still difficult for those with limited 
English proficiency to navigate the process. Even 

“With the way that they word it out, if I didn’t 
have the drop-in center staff, I wouldn’t be able 
to do it by myself. A lot of the questions are very 
documented and formal.” — SNAP Recipient

“[Our clients] always express to us how the 
application is very long, it’s very wordy, and 
sometimes confusing for them to understand what 
the question is asking.” — SNAP Outreach Provider

NEED HELP IN ANOTHER LANGUAGE?
CHOOSE A LANGUAGE BELOW

English

Français

Ilokano

国话

Español

廣東話

Chuukese

Deutsche

ʻŌlelo Hawaiʻi

日本語

Marshallese

Tagalog

한국인

Samoan

Tongan

Tiếng Việt

Visayan

A re-creation of the language selection menue on the Hawaiʻi State Department of Human Services’ Public 
Assistance Information System website.

14 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS

CLIENT EXPERIENCE

Applying for SNAP requires multiple documents, 
including proof of identity, residence, citizenship 
or lawful immigration status, number of household 
members, all forms of income, and proof of 
expenses such as childcare, utilities and healthcare. 

It can be a challenge for some applicants to keep 
track of their required eligibility documentation—
in particular for individuals without stable 
housing. Sometimes the process to acquire the 
necessary documents can take months.

“So many people have trouble getting the 
verification documents. They qualify for SNAP, 
but gosh! Getting a birth certificate from a state 
they haven’t been in decades? These people 
are living off the grid, they don’t have an ID, 
they don’t have a driver’s license. If DHS could 
somehow interface with other agencies to get 
these documents, that would be awesome.” 
— SNAP Outreach Provider

RECERTIFICATION AND CHURN

SNAP enrollment is not a permanent status. In order 
to remain enrolled, recipients must complete both six-
month and annual reports verifying their continuing 
eligibility —a process known as recertification. 

Failure to submit the annual report is the number 
one reason that individuals are denied continued 
enrollment and must re-apply, a phenomenon known 
as “churn.” Our interviews confirmed that completing 
annual recertification requirements can be stressful. 

A recipient recounted the difficult experiences many of 
her friends had with SNAP in the past, explaining why 
they did not want to reapply for their benefits after 
losing them.

“They remember how strenuous it is to just fill out 
the application, get the documents in, then make 
sure you get in for the interview…People don’t 
know, but having SNAP is like having a frickin’ 
part-time job… you can only get the help for a 
month or two.”

A SNAP recipient who missed his recertification 
deadline, lost his benefits, and was finally able to 
re-enter the program two years later with the help 
of an outreach provider described the difficulty in 
contacting the SNAP office for help:

“It was a nightmare. I couldn’t get through [to the 
office]. I called every day.”

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 15

CLIENT EXPERIENCE

PROFILE
NAME: TOM
LOCATION: EAST HAWAIʻI ISLAND

Tom had been on SNAP for five years when he 
received a letter from DHS informing him that he 
was $30 over the income limit. However, after 
factoring in his medical bills from three surgeries, 
Tom believed that he should have been well 
beneath this cutoff. 

He contacted a SNAP outreach provider, who 
agreed that Tom’s medical expenses did not seem 
to be properly accounted for. Despite being told 
by a DHS worker that he would likely lose an 
appeal, Tom proceeded to file an appeal against 
DHS’ decision.

Throughout this ordeal, Tom said that he was 
unable to reach SNAP representatives over the 
phone. Tom recommended that we “call the toll 
free number and see how long it takes to get a 
human being.” 

One of the letters that Tom received from DHS 
was postmarked 8 days after the date printed 
on the letterhead, allowing him less than a 
week to address its demands. To ensure timely 
communication, Tom asked DHS personnel to 
send him letters by email, but they claimed that 
they were not “set up” for email correspondence. 

After nearly giving up on his appeal, Tom 
eventually managed to re-qualify for SNAP. He 
expressed his gratitude for the SNAP outreach 
worker who had helped him along the way, 
exclaiming that she gives a “hell of an effort to 
make sure that people qualify [for SNAP].”

“SNAP is a great program, they just gotta manage 
it better.” He believed there were internal 
miscommunications at DHS that needed to be 
sorted out.

16 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

CHALLENGES AND 
OPPORTUNITIES

This section examines the issues that were frequently mentioned by service providers, 
SNAP recipients, and DHS staff during our interview process. We have organized 
these issues into four broad categories. Each section outlines challenges raised by 
interviewees, which are then followed by recommendations for improvement.

IMPROVE DATA 
ACCESS

EXPAND NUTRITION 
INCENTIVES

EXPAND PROGRAM 
ELIGIBILITY & 
PARTICIPATION

IMPROVE EFFICIENCY 
& CAPACITY

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 17

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

IMPROVE DATA ACCESS

RECOMMENDATIONS 

1.  Data request portal: Expand the public’s access to SNAP enrollment data through the 

creation of a data request portal monitored by the state office. 

2.  Annual county-level reports: Provide annual county-level reports on the DHS website with 
statistics on participation and benefits distributed, broken down by ethnicity, age, and 
citizenship status.

There is a wealth of SNAP data available from a variety 
of different sources. Primary data sources include 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the Hawaiʻi 
Department of Human Services, and the U.S. Census 
Bureau. However, navigating this data landscape to 
find meaningful trends can be challenging, and data 
sources often contradict one another. 

Reporting lags 

Some analyses aggregate years, resulting in a multi-
year reporting lag. One of the most critical measures of 
state performance—the percentage of eligible people 
enrolled—is only reported by the USDA, and relies on 
three-year aggregate analyses. The most recent data is 
from before the pandemic, in 2018. The same is true for 
participation rates among eligible seniors. 

County and island-level data 

All of the outreach providers interviewed agreed that 
SNAP enrollment data provides valuable insights 
on the state of the program, allowing them to better 

understand the populations they serve. Providers 
would like to have greater access to disaggregated 
data for each county, and age and ethnicity were 
highlighted as the greatest need.

“When we’re writing grants, we’re trying to get 
the most updated info on who’s using SNAP 
specifically for [our] county. I know there’s a lot for 
all the state…How much money is coming to [our 
community] through the SNAP program? Even for 
each ahupuaʻa?” — SNAP Outreach Provider 

DHS offers the most granular geographic data of the 
three sources (and also the most recent) through their 
monthly timeliness and participation reports. These are 
published on their website in pdf format. 

These monthly reports offer information on the number 
of applications received and approved, as well as 
timeliness of processing, broken down by processing 
center. They also offer the total benefits issued and total 
participation (households and individuals) by island. 
However, no demographic information is provided.

18 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

EXPAND NUTRITION INCENTIVES

RECOMMENDATIONS 

1.  Acquire state and/or county matching funds: The state legislature should appropriate $3 

million in matching funds for Hawaiʻi’s 2023 Gus Schumacher Nutrition Incentive Program 
(GusNIP) application, which would cover expansion to all Foodland stores statewide. 

2.  Advocate for sustained federal funding for GusNIP through the 2023 Farm Bill and the 

American Rescue Plan. 

3.  Expand signage and in-store marketing: Educate and encourage DA BUX participating 

grocery stores to utilize prominent and creative in-store marketing and signage.

“IN HAWAIʻI, THE STATE LEGISLATURE HAS ONLY PROVIDED $100,000 
APPROPRIATION OVER TWO YEARS TO SUPPORT DA BUX PROGRAM, OR LESS 
THAN 3% OF THE TOTAL PROGRAM OPERATING COST FOR FISCAL YEAR 2021.”

The Double Up Food Bucks program (known in Hawaiʻi 
as DA BUX; www.dabux.org) partners with food retailers 
statewide to provide a 50 percent discount for Hawaiʻi 
grown fruits and vegetables to SNAP recipients. The 
program has been highly successful since its statewide 
launch in 2019, saving Hawaiʻi’s SNAP recipients $1.66 
million in discounts in 2021 alone.24

Funding sustainability

obligation required by the primary USDA funding 
source, known as the Gus Schumacher Nutrition 
Incentive Program (GusNIP). 

Other states have been able to allocate state funding 
to support this match. In Hawaiʻi, the state legislature 
has only provided $100,000 appropriation over two 
years to support the program, or less than 3 percent of 
the total program operating cost for fiscal year 2021.

Despite the overwhelming success and positive 
reception of DA BUX, it is a perennial challenge to fund 
the program and expand access to more retailers and 
SNAP users, largely due to the 100 percent matching 

Continued funding for the program requires that 
Hawaiʻi’s nonprofit administering agency, The Food 
Basket, submit regular, lengthy applications for 
GusNIP funding. 

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 19

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

Figure 5. DA BUX Awareness by SNAP Recipients, 
Hawaiʻi (2022)29

Figure 6. DA BUX Utilization by SNAP Recipients 
Aware of the Program, Hawaiʻi (2022)30

100%

92%

75%

69%

70%

62%

50%

25%

0%

39%

100%

75%

50%

25%

0%

85%

82%

76%

73%

14%

State

Hawaiʻi 
County

Kauaʻi 
County

Honolulu
County

Maui 
County

State

Hawaiʻi 
County

Kauaʻi 
County

Honolulu
County

Maui 
County

Figure 5 shows that, in Hawaiʻi, 69% of SNAP recipients statewide were aware of the DA BUX program in 
2022. Compare that to Figure 6, which shows that, of those Hawaiʻi SNAP recipients who were aware of the 
DA BUX program in 2022, 76% made use of the program that year.

“The current competitive grant process is not 
sustainable for our growth, as it requires a plan for 
substantial program expansion or innovation each 
time we apply.” — DA BUX Coordinator25

make an effort to use it whenever possible, a 2022 
statewide DA BUX awareness assessment found wide 
disparities between the level of DA BUX awareness and 
utilization across each county.27

Long-term, sustained funding would allow for an 
increased yearly operating budget over a multi-year 
period to safely/equitably expand DA BUX to more 
grocery store locations (e.g. all Foodlands, Safeway 
etc). While most grocery stores in Hawaiʻi carry DA 
BUX eligible produce, the majority of grocery stores 
statewide do not participate in DA BUX.26

Awareness and Access

Although the  majority of SNAP recipients we 
interviewed are aware of the DA BUX program and 

A few recipients we interviewed said they had 
difficulty determining which items qualify for the DA 
BUX discount, while respondents to the 2022 DA BUX 
awareness assessment also expressed concern with 
a lack of in-store marketing and signage for eligible 
produce as well as DA BUX not being available at 
the grocery stores where they most frequently shop 
(e.g., Safeway, Foodland, etc.). This lack of in-store 
marketing and program availability at popular grocery 
store locations has resulted in low program awareness 
in a majority of counties and low utilization, especially 
in Maui County.28

20 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

EXPAND PROGRAM ELIGIBILITY & 
PARTICIPATION

RECOMMENDATIONS 

1.  Advocate for higher SNAP eligibility thresholds at the federal level: Policymakers and 

advocates should ask the federal government to increase the net income requirements for 
SNAP recipients.  

2.  Support the Biden Administration’s efforts to expand eligibility: Work with Hawaiʻi’s 

congressional delegation to eliminate eligibility restrictions for college students and other 
underserved groups.  

3.  Pass state legislation to remove the partial restriction on individuals with felony drug 

convictions. 

4.  Expand eligibility to COFA citizens: Partner with advocates from other states with high 
Compact of Free Association (COFA) populations to identify pathways and push for 
expansion on the federal level. 

5.  Prepare for economic changes that would result in mass benefits cliffs: Providers and 

advocates should work closely with DHS and other agencies to identify looming changes–
such as loss of federal aid, minimum wage increases, or a cost of living increase–that could 
lead to abrupt loss of benefits for large swaths of SNAP recipients. 

6.  Implement the Elderly Simplified Application Project (ESAP) to facilitate enrollment and 

reduce churn among Hawaii’s senior population. 

7.  Maximize deductions: In order to ensure that all eligible households maximize their 
allotments, states, participants, advocates and case workers should be aware of key 
policies that allow deductions, in particular for medical and dependent care.  

8.  Replace the Thrifty Food Plan with the Low-Cost Food Plan: Advocates should support 

including this provision in the next Farm Bill, or supporting the Closing the Meal Gap Act of 
2021, which already contains this provision.

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 21

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

“IN HAWAIʻI, THE REALITY IS THAT A FAMILY OF FOUR FOLLOWING THE THRIFTY 
FOOD PLAN WOULD SPEND $1,794.60 PER MONTH ON FOOD—A FULL TWO-THIRDS 
OF THE NET INCOME LIMIT FOR A FAMILY OF FOUR IN HAWAIʻI.”

INCOME ELIGIBILITY

In order to qualify for SNAP, applicants must meet 
both gross and net income requirements that are 
based on the Federal Poverty Level (FPL). The original 
FPL calculations assumed that a household would 
spend one-third of its budget on food.

In Hawaiʻi, the reality is that a family of four following 
the Thrifty Food Plan would spend $1,794.60 per 
month on food31—a full two-thirds of the net income 
limit for a family of four in Hawaiʻi. 

Data from our assessment highlights that this is 
a major concern, with many of the recipients and 
providers we interviewed believing that the gross and 
net income limits for SNAP should be raised. 

“He only makes $17 an hour, full-time, 40 hours. 
I know for a fact there’s no way you can make 
“too much” living in Hawaiʻi … especially with 
four kids.”

“You pay $1,800 in rent, $300 in electric, $400 in 
the phone bills … and now you have four little 
kids running around, and you gotta feed them. 
Now she has to use cash … I just felt really bad for 
her. Why can’t they make the qualifications a little 
bit lighter?”

Benefit Cliffs 

If an individual’s net income is even one dollar above 

the limit, their SNAP benefits are canceled. This has 
resulted in a “benefit cliff” for the program, where 
people who earn above the income limit suddenly 
lose their eligibility.

Several recipients mentioned having to weigh 
getting a new job or pay raise against losing their 
SNAP benefits. One recipient described how she was 
enrolled in SNAP while she worked part-time, but lost 
her benefits when she switched to full-time work. 
She then successfully reapplied for SNAP once she 
returned to part-time work, although she has lingering 
concerns about her future eligibility for the program.

Broad-Based Categorical Eligibility

Federal SNAP rules limit applicants’ gross income—
the total amount they earn before taxes and 
deductions—to 130 percent of the FPL.32 Hawaiʻi is 
one of a handful of states that takes advantage of an 
option known as Broad-Based Categorical Eligibility 
(BBCE), which allows states to raise the gross income 
limit. Hawaiʻi uses BBCE to raise its gross income limit 
to 200 percent of the FPL, the maximum allowable by 
federal law. 

An applicant’s net income is then determined after 
deductions for child care, medical care, extra shelter 
costs, and other expenses are applied to their gross 
income. This amount cannot exceed 100 percent of 
the FPL, even with the BBCE provision.33

22 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

$5,320.00

$4,415.00

Figure 7. Gross and Net Income Limits by Household Size, Hawaiʻi (2022)34

$6,000

$4,000

$2,000

$0

$3,510.00

$2,605.00

$2,281.50

$1,693.25

$1,755.00

$1,302.50

$2,869.75

$2,660.00

$3,458.00

$2,207.50

1

2

3

4

Net monthly income 
(Cannot exceed 100% FPL 
after qualifying expenses 
deducted)

Household Size

Gross monthly income 
threshold without BBCE 
(Cannot exceed 130% FPL)

Gross monthly income 
threshold in Hawaiʻi (BBCE 
increases qualifying income 
to 200% FPL)

Figure 7. Broad-Based Categorical Eligibility increases the gross income limit from 130% to 200%, allowing more 
families to fall under the qualifying income for eligibility. This means that a family of four could qualify if they make 
less than $5,320 per month.

KŪPUNA

Seniors and people with disabilities who are on fixed income can risk losing their SNAP benefits if their 
other government benefits are increased. For instance, a number of the seniors who participate in 
SNAP also receive supplemental security income (SSI), a federal benefit that is intended for individuals 
with low incomes and few assets.35 

In January of 2022, the SSI program had its largest cost of living increase in 40 years, rising from $794 
to $841. If the household has other sources of income, this could push them over the income limits, 
disqualifying them from the program if they earn just $1 above the cutoff.

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 23

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

INELIGIBLE POPULATIONS

“THESE INDIVIDUALS PAY TAXES JUST LIKE OTHER U.S. RESIDENTS, BUT THE 
WELFARE REFORM ACT OF 1996 REMOVED ACCESS TO SNAP AND OTHER PUBLIC 
BENEFITS PROGRAMS THROUGH A DEFINITION TECHNICALITY.”

Even though SNAP eligibility is primarily determined 
by income, there are a host of eligibility requirements 
that override income limits. Fortunately, Hawaiʻi’s 
SNAP office is proactive at taking advantage of many 
waivers for eligibility. 

However, there are still federal restrictions for many 
Hawaiʻi residents, including non-citizens, people with 
felony drug convictions, and full time students (with 
some exceptions). 

The Biden-Harris administration has recommended as 
part of the National Strategy on Hunger, Nutrition, and 
Health to work with Congress to lift these eligibility 
restrictions,36 which make up a significant portion of 
Hawaiʻi’s population.

the ban completely, Hawaiʻi is one of 20 states that 
still institutes a “modified ban” that restricts SNAP 
participation for people with felony drug convictions.39 

This means that people with felony drug convictions 
must “comply with [drug] treatment” or have “not 
refused or failed to comply with [drug] treatment” 
to regain eligibility.40 This additional restriction 
places some of Hawaiʻi’s most vulnerable citizens 
at increased risk of losing access to a vital resource 
essential for self-sufficiency upon re-entry. 

The 2021 United States Sentencing Commission 
Federal Sentencing Statistics Report found that 48 
percent of all federal sentences in Hawaiʻi were drug 
related, compared to 31 percent nationally.41 

College Students 

COFA citizens and non-U.S. citizens

In 2020, there were around 89,206 college (including 
graduate and professional school) students living 
in Hawaiʻi, and 67.9 percent of them would have 
theoretically been eligible for SNAP under the state’s 
gross income limit for a one-person household—
amounting to a total estimated population of 60,542 
individuals.37 However, their status as a college student 
can still disqualify them unless they are also working at 
least 20 hours per week or have a dependent.

Partially as reparations for the detrimental health 
and environmental impacts of more than a decade of 
nuclear weapons testing on their native land, and in 
exchange for military control over a large swath of the 
Pacific, the U.S. offers citizens of the Marshall Islands, 
Palau and the Federated States of Micronesia the 
opportunity to permanently live and work in the U.S, 
through an agreement known as the Compact of Free 
Association (COFA).42, 43

People with felony drug convictions 

Federal law prohibits people with a felony drug 
conviction from being eligible for SNAP. However, 
states have the option to opt-out or modify this 
ban.38 While nearly 30 states have opted to remove 

Beginning in 1986, tens of thousands of COFA citizens 
moved to the U.S. in search of better economic 
opportunities for themselves and their families. In 
2018, there were roughly 24,755 COFA residents living 
in Hawaiʻi,44 the highest of any state in the U.S. These 
individuals pay taxes just like other U.S. residents, but 

24 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

the Welfare Reform Act of 1996 removed access to 
SNAP and other public benefits programs through a 
definition technicality.45

children in the household receive it. This means that 
COFA households receive less resources to make ends 
meet relative to other households. 

U.S-born children of COFA citizens are eligible. 
However, income eligibility is determined by the adult 
guardians in the household, who are not eligible 
themselves. In other words, although according to 
SNAP income requirements, all the family members 
are deemed to be in need of SNAP assistance, only the 

One COFA citizen we spoke with shared that she felt 
her U.S. citizen children were unfairly disadvantaged 
because of her immigration status.

“Not having SNAP makes us have to work harder 
to survive.”

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 25

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

ELDERLY SIMPLIFIED APPLICATION PROJECT

As we noted earlier in this report, seniors typically 
participate in SNAP at lower rates than other age 
groups. One way to make SNAP more accessible for 
this population, and also to reduce churn, is through 
the Elderly Simplified Application Project (ESAP).

ESAP is a collection of federal waivers that makes it 
easier to get seniors enrolled in SNAP. States use the 
ESAP waivers for three primary objectives. These include: 

1.  Extending the recertification period from one to 

three years; 

2.  Eliminating the need for an interview to re-certify 

SNAP benefits; and 

3.  Only requiring verification documents from the 

client if the information is questionable (gathering 
and submitting these documents is often one 
of the most burdensome parts of the SNAP 
application process).  

While data is still emerging, there is anecdotal evidence 
that the ESAP, in combination with other modifications, 
significantly improves the customer service experience 

Figure 8. Number of SNAP Case Denials for Seniors by Denial Reason, Hawaiʻi (May–Sept., 2022)

May

June

July

Aug.

Sept.

Avg.

Earned Income

Unearned Income

Failed to Provide Info

Withdrawn

Volume Closure

Assets

Death

Failed to Submit Report

Incomplete Report

Failed to Submit Annual Report

Whereabouts Unknown

0

2,000

4,000

6,000

Number of Cases

Figure 8. “Failed to Submit Annual Report” is the number one reason for churn, something that could be mitigated 
with longer certification periods.

26 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

 
and reduces administrative burden in early 
adopting states. A former analysis conducted 
by Hawaiʻi Appleseed found that the successful 
rollout of ESAP in Hawaiʻi could potentially add 
more than 6,500 seniors to the program.46

In order to obtain approval from the USDA 
to pursue these objectives, the ESAP waiver 
requires that the state match data that has 
already been collected (i.e. income and social 
security number) with the applicant. DHS 
is working on an updated eligibility system 
(discussed later in this report) that would make 
this data match feasible so that Hawaiʻi can 
apply for the project.

MAXIMIZE MONTHLY ALLOTMENTS

Beyond adjusting the program’s eligibility requirements, 
there are also opportunities to assist families in ensuring 
they receive the appropriate level of benefits (known as 
“monthly allotments”) once enrolled.

Deductions

As previously stated, Hawaiʻi allows those with gross 
incomes up to 200 percent of the FPL to be considered 
eligible, as long as they can prove that their net 
income is less than 100 percent after deducting 
monthly costs. The final net income is used to 
determine the monthly allotment, which can be as 
little as $43.00 or up to $1,573.00 for a family of four.47 

Like other states, Hawaiʻi fares poorly in taking 
advantage of two key deductions that help 
households fully maximize their monthly allotments. 

According to the most recent data available, only 5 
percent of households with seniors or people with 
disabilities claimed the medical deduction.48 And only 
6 percent of single-adult households with children 
claimed the dependent care deduction.49

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

Emergency Allotments

The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a number of 
temporary flexibilities and expansion of the SNAP 
program. As long as Hawaiʻi continues to extend 
the public health emergency declaration, SNAP 
households will continue to receive emergency 
allotments (EAs), which allow all households to 
receive the maximum monthly allotment. However, 
these waivers are expected to end in early 2023.

“I’m very grateful for what I get, but I know it’s 
[the emergency allotment] gonna end, and I don’t 
want it to end.” 

Thrifty Food Plan

Every year, the USDA adjusts its Thrifty Food Plan 
(TFP), which is supposed to reflect the cost of 
providing nutritious meals for a family of four in the 
U.S. It then uses this plan to calculate the maximum 
allowable SNAP benefits for that year—with special 
rates for Alaska and Hawaiʻi.50 

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 27

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

Figure 9. Maximum SNAP Benefit by Household Size, Hawaiʻi (FY 2023)51

$4,000

$3,000

$2,000

$1,000

$538

$0

t
n
u
o
m
A
t
ﬁ
e
n
e
B

$3,230

$2,826

$2,557

$2,131

$1,794

$1,413

$987

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Household Size

$404

Each 
Add.
Family 
Member

Figure 9. Not all households will qualify for the maximum allotment. However, taking advantage of deductions is 
an important step to ensuring households get the most they are qualified for.

Despite the special rate, nationally, the maximum 
allotments still fall short of the cost of affordably 
priced meals—an average of 10 percent in urban 
areas and 12 percent in rural areas.52, 53 And while it 
is true that SNAP is only intended to supplement a 
household’s food budget, respondents we spoke with 
told us this is not usually the case.

“I would need to choose between the food and 
the bills, still. Only because with my income that 
I make...at the end of paying all the bills, I think 
I have like $200 left. And that would either be for 
food or gas for the car.”

The Food Research Action Center (FRAC) has identified 

a number of issues with the Thrifty Food Plan, which 
is the least expensive of the four food-cost plans 
under the USDA. These issues include unrealistic 
assumptions that the plan makes regarding food 
preparation, availability, and affordability. 

The Closing the Meal Gap Act of 2021 sought to 
implement the USDA’s Low-Cost Food Plan to replace the 
Thrifty Food Plan, and to expand deductions allowing 
more struggling households to participate.54 As of the 
publication of this report, the USDA has not updated the 
basis of the Low Cost Food Plan amounts for Hawaiʻi 
since 2007.55 However, based on the prior levels, it could 
result in approximately 30 percent increase in maximum 
monthly allotment over current levels.

28 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

 
CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

IMPROVE EFFICIENCY & CAPACITY

RECOMMENDATIONS 

1. 

Improve line staff retention by providing incentives and advancement opportunities: In the 
short term, this could include putting in place workforce optimization tools and opening 
up opportunities for telework. Longer term, work with unions to reclassify front line staff 
positions as “professionals.” 

2.  Expedite the Integrated Benefits Eligibility System rollout: The rollout should be paired 

with detailed staff training and technical assistance. 

3.  Continue investigating the possibility of connecting the SNAP and WIC eligibility systems. 

4.  Create a new business process engineering manager position at BESSD to oversee and 
update processing center operations. This position would work closely with the SNAP 
policy office and section administrators to gather suggestions from line staff, and ensure 
consistent implementation of program requirements 

5.  Allocate increased funding for contracted outreach providers, tied to expanding outreach to 

difficult-to-reach populations such as those in unstable housing.  

6.  Resume and expand DHS’ outreach efforts by adding a branch-level outreach manager 

position. This person would encourage more direct outreach events with eligibility workers 
across the state, so that individuals could get approved or re-certified on the spot. 

7.  Facilitate quarterly outreach convenings, with a structured agenda that allows sharing 

but also specifically identifies needs related to policy and protocol changes on the federal, 
state, and county levels.

DHS’ SNAP processing centers are at the core of the 
program. The personnel in these centers, known 
as line staff, are tasked with determining the final 
eligibility of SNAP applicants, enrolling them in the 
program, and periodically recertifying their benefits. 

There is at least one processing center for every 

county in Hawaiʻi (excluding Kalawao County), and 
there are multiple processing centers on the more 
populous islands.

“I love the clients, because you’re helping real 
people in need…and that’s why I stayed.” — SNAP 
Eligibility Worker

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 29

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

Out of all of the areas covered in this report, processing 
center capacity and efficiency presents the most 
opportunities that are ripe for action at the state level. 

Because this is such a large and multifaceted 
concern, this final section of the report is organized 
into four “interface points,” or junctions where 

communication and collaboration could be 
improved between parties. These four junctions are: 

1.  Line staff and client;
2.  DHS administration and line staff;
3.  DHS and outreach providers; and
4.  Provider to provider.

1. LINE STAFF TO CLIENT: IMPROVE CUSTOMER SERVICE & REDUCE BACKLOGS

The SNAP eligibility workers we interviewed openly 
acknowledged a persistent backlog of cases, and the 
impossible workload they are burdened with. While 
in recent years, Hawaii has been able to achieve high 
rates of timeliness on application processing, in 2021 
timeliness dipped, a sign that application outweighed 
worker capacity. 

“A lot of workers …say too, how hard it is, how 
burnt out [they are].” — Eligibility Worker

“The volume of what needs to be done—
compared to the amount of people and 
the resources that we have to do it—is very 
outweighed.” — Eligibility Worker

Staff Retention

One theme that arose was that DHS’ lack of capacity 
is directly related to the hiring and retention issues 
at its processing centers. Several people mentioned 
frequent staff turnover and vacant positions. 

Eligibility worker salaries start at $38,004 and can go 
as high as $80,088.56 We did not ask staff to disclose 
where in the range they fell, but some workers 
believed that their wages were too low to compensate 
for the cost of living in Hawaiʻi.

“What’s gonna stop me from getting a job at 
Macy’s full-time? It’s gonna be less stress than 
what I’m doing now.” — Eligibility Worker

Call center

Each processing center has its own phone number 
that is staffed by rotations of eligibility workers. 
However, since processing centers have been unable 
to keep up with the sheer volume of calls they receive, 
DHS has also contracted a local IT firm to operate a 
call center. Even with this added capacity, a common 
complaint among SNAP recipients and service 
providers is that it is difficult to reach DHS personnel 
over the phone.

“I don’t leave a message, I just call a hundred 
times in a row if I have to before somebody 
answers. I want to get my answer right then and 
there.”  — SNAP Recipient

Technology & online self-service portal

In 2020, pandemic-induced office closures prompted 
DHS to introduce an online application that many 
interviewees welcomed, although some minor problems 
were reported. In particular, some elderly SNAP 
recipients do not have access to the Internet, either due 
to the cost or the remoteness of their location.

“Technically, [the line staff] have better benefits 
and wages working at the hotels.” — Eligibility 
Worker

“I don’t have Internet. Do you think everyone’s 
got that?” — Elderly SNAP Recipient

30 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

 
 
CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

Figure 10. Timeliness of SNAP Application Decisions by Year, Hawaiʻi (2011–2021)*, 57, 58

95.47% 96.89% 97.32% 96.69% 97.76% 97.28% 96.53% 96.55%

89.34%

100.00%

USDA's 
acceptable 
timeliness 
rate is 95%

84.79%

75.00%

74.64%

50.00%

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020 2021

Timely

In 2011, DHS reengineered their SNAP 
application processing system to remedy 
poor timeliness.

Figure 10. *Data for 2018, 2020, 2021 is incomplete. 

DHS line staff also expressed frustration about 
the computer system they utilize for processing 
applications. In some cases, they are required to use 
up to four separate programs to access information 
on a single case. The main program for entering 
information about cases, known as JAVI, has not been 
updated since the early 1980s. 

DHS’ leadership is aware of these issues and is 
currently working to modernize their application 
system. This online portal, known as the Benefits 

Eligibility System, would consolidate the multiple 
platforms currently being used into a single interface, 
allowing clients to apply for and manage multiple 
benefits, including SNAP, TANF and MedQUEST. Most 
importantly, it would allow clients to take on many 
basic account management tasks themselves, such 
as upload documents, submit reporting forms, check 
account balances, and make changes to their account. 

Unfortunately, because the WIC program is 
administered by a different agency (the Hawaiʻi State 

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 31

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

Department of Health), this new system will not be 
able to incorporate WIC enrollment, even though the 
requirements are fairly similar for women who are 
pregnant or have young children.

A pilot project is underway as of the writing of this 
report to determine whether another mechanism 
for dual enrollment can be implemented for WIC 
and SNAP.

2. ADMINISTRATION TO LINE STAFF: STANDARDIZE OPERATIONS STATEWIDE

Our interviews revealed a significant lack of 
standardization and consistency in application 
and recertification processes between processing 
centers. A veteran eligibility worker stated that she 
frequently notices mistakes made by workers in other 
processing centers, concluding that many of them 
need to be retrained.

Another eligibility worker described the challenges of 
state-wide standardization due to what they called a 
culture of “small town mentality and focus” within her 
processing center.

“Like any small town, people do things the 
way they do them. And it’s their habit, and it’s 
entrenched. And outsiders that come in and try to 
ruffle everything up, they don’t go over so well.” 

Eligibility workers brought up problems ranging 
from incorrect updates to an application’s status to 
miscommunication with clients. One eligibility worker 
told us that she often receives clients in-person who 
had been refused by another center on the island:

“They actually have printed out a map to our 
place and given it to clients.”

3. ADMINISTRATION TO OUTREACH CONTRACTORS: EXPAND OUTREACH CAPACITY

DHS currently contracts with eight organizations 
statewide to provide pre-screenings and application 
assistance for Hawaiʻi residents. These SNAP outreach 
providers are responsible for contacting potential 
SNAP applicants, assessing their potential eligibility 
for the program, and helping them complete the 
application. In many cases, outreach providers will 
also help their clients with problems that arise during 
the recertification process. 

“We’re at hospitals, we’re at family centers, 
we’re at neighborhood centers. We’ve got 
our information all over the place.” — SNAP 
Outreach Provider 

The majority of these organizations told us that their 
resources were stretched thin, and some of them 
believed they were taking on work that should be the 
responsibility of processing centers. One outreach 

worker spoke about the increased workload that came 
with the pandemic. 

“We’ve been in reactive mode because DHS was 
closed to the public for two years. We were sort 
of just picking up the slack that they left with 
their offices being closed.”

“[We] could always use more funding. We could be 
doing so much more. Really being proactive and 
targeting [groups like] veterans and students.” 

Service providers reported that much of their job 
involves attempting to liaise between clients and 
processing centers, although many admitted that 
they don’t have a reliable contact to reach out to. 
The eligibility workers we interviewed confirmed that 
outside of referrals, they had limited contact with 
service providers. 

32 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

“When we would try to connect them with 
a processing center, we could either not get 
through [to] them, we couldn’t leave a message…
Eventually, we were able to communicate with 
someone, but it just took a lot longer than 
expected.” — SNAP Outreach Provider

Before the COVID-19 pandemic, processing center 
staff would occasionally hold their own community 

outreach events, and DHS states that they plan to 
resume this kind of outreach in the near future. 

A few of the providers we spoke with reported that 
having a direct line of communication with the branch 
manager responsible for oversight of their contract 
used to be an effective strategy for tracking down 
sticky cases. However, staff turnover has made this 
strategy inconsistent.

ISSUES FOR KŪPUNA

More involved outreach methods are necessary 
to reach older individuals. As one service provider 
said, “You know what kind of relationship you 
gotta make with kūpuna. I mean, they wanna 

know who you are, they gotta trust you first.” At 
least three of the service providers we talked 
to make a special effort to hold SNAP outreach 
events at affordable housing projects for seniors.

4. PROVIDER TO PROVIDER: RELATIONSHIP BUILDING AND INFORMATION SHARING

Outside of client referrals, eight out of the 11 service 
providers we interviewed did not consistently 
communicate about SNAP with other provider 
organizations, whether contracted by DHS or 
operating independently. 

One provider shared that there used to be quarterly 
meetings available to DHS-contracted outreach 
providers throughout the state, although those have 
since ceased. 

The idea of some kind of intentional, facilitated 
communication between providers was met with 
some interest from all the providers we interviewed: 

“It would be great if we could collaborate and 
maybe meet once a quarter or something. [We 
could talk about] our challenges, what works well, 
what doesn’t. Cause we’re the only ones who do 
this regularly.”

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 33

CHALLENGES & OPPORTUNITIES

PROFILE
NAME: MARY
LOCATION: MAUI, HAWAIʻI

Mary is a senior who recently enrolled in SNAP 
for the first time. “I was making $13 an hour. 
Between what my boyfriend made and I made, 
we were doing okay. We weren’t rich, but we had 
enough to get by,” she remembered. However, 
after suffering a stroke, Mary could no longer 
work, and her boyfriend at the time decided to 
move out.

“Since he left, I said well, you know, ʻI gotta get a 
roommate’ because I can’t pay $2,400 a month.” 
Even with a roommate, Mary could barely afford 
her living expenses. One day, she received an 
unexpected call from a SNAP outreach worker 
asking about her financial situation. “She said, ‘My 
goodness, how do you make it?’” Mary recalled.

With the help of this outreach worker, Mary 
successfully applied for her SNAP benefit, and 
she has been extremely grateful for the impact 
that it has had on her life. Although she has made 
strides in her recovery, Mary’s limited mobility 
is an impediment to everyday activities such as 
shopping and household chores, and she has to 
pay out-of-pocket for transportation costs. Since 
SNAP provides her with a stable means of paying 
for food, it has given her more breathing room to 
pay for other important bills. “I don’t know what I 
would do [without SNAP],” she admitted.

With that being said, Mary is troubled by her loss 
of independence. “I don’t like it. I never had to 
have help before.” 

34 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

METHODOLOGY

The structure and methodology of this assessment 
were originally inspired by the Hawaiʻi Alliance 
for Community-Based Economic Development 
(HACBED)’s 2018 SNAP inquiry.59 

This report relies on qualitative data gathered from 
interviews with service providers, SNAP recipients, 
staff at processing centers, and DHS administrators.

In the interest of obtaining candid feedback, we 
chose to conceal the identities of the interviewees. 

Furthermore, several interviewees only agreed to 
participate on the condition of anonymity.

By engaging in discussions with service providers, 
recipients, and line staff, we were able to cross-reference 
the issues that were mentioned. This helped us to 
determine whether their issues were indicative of larger, 
systemic challenges rather than isolated instances. 
In addition, we asked them about the availability 
of SNAP eligibility and enrollment data and made 
recommendations for increased data transparency.

Interview Snapshot (*Contracted by DHS to provide SNAP Outreach services)

Organization

Kūpuna Collective

Aloha United Way 211*

Helping Hands Hawaiʻi*

County

Statewide

Statewide

City & County of Honolulu

Waiʻanae Neighborhood Place*

City & County of Honolulu

Lanakila Pacific*

Catholic Charities

The Food Basket*

County of Hawaiʻi Food Access Coordinator

Project Vision*

Child & Family Services*

Mālama Kauaʻi

City & County of Honolulu

City & County of Honolulu

Hawaiʻi County

Hawaiʻi County

Maui County

Kauaʻi County

Kauaʻi County

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 35

METHODOLOGY

SNAP Service Providers (11 Organizations)

SNAP Recipients (39 Individuals)

18.2%

18.2%

9.1%

18.2%

36.4%

Statewide

Honolulu

Hawaiʻi

Maui

Kauaʻi

20.5%

12.3%

38.5%

10.3%

17.9%

Oʻahu

Maui

Molokai

Kauaʻi

Hawaiʻi
Island

INTERVIEW PROCESS

We interviewed representatives of 11 service providers 
from across Hawaiʻi, including seven of the eight that 
are currently contracted by DHS to provide SNAP 
outreach services (Hawaiʻi Food Bank was added later 
and not interviewed for this project). In addition, we 
interviewed 39 current or recent recipients of SNAP in 
every county of Hawaiʻi. 

interview individuals who were under the age of 40. 

We reached SNAP recipients through online surveys, 
community pantry events, and referrals by outreach 
providers. To encourage participation, we offered 
each interviewee a $50 gift card to a grocery store of 
their choice. 

We attempted to interview a diverse mix of recipients, 
but we did not initially target specific groups, such as 
seniors or young adults. Once we realized that the age 
distribution of the interviewees was skewed towards 
older adults, we began making an intentional effort to 

We also interviewed 11 line staff from DHS over the 
phone. Ten of these interviewees were eligibility 
workers, and one of them was an office assistant. We 
did not report on which island these staff were located 
in order to protect anonymity.

LIMITATIONS

There were a number of practical considerations that 
affected the scope of this report. Due to limited capacity 
and funds, we were unable to conduct a large-scale 
assessment. Consequently, the feedback we received is 
not necessarily reflective of the entire program. 

In addition, we acknowledge that the demographic 
composition of the interviewees may not be an accurate 

representation of Hawaiʻi’s actual SNAP population. 

Only a small minority of the interviewees were under 
the age of 40, even though this age group accounts for 
more than a quarter of the SNAP recipients in Hawaiʻi. 
In terms of ethnicity, our report included the following 
key ethnic groups: Native Hawaiians, Pacific Islanders, 
Filipinos and Micronesians. 

36 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

ENDNOTES

“SNAP Fact Sheet Hawaiʻi,” Center on Budget 

1. 
and Policy Priorities, April 25, 2022, https://www.cbpp.
org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/snap_factsheet_
hawaii.pdf

2. 
“SNAP Data Tables: National and/or State Level 
Monthly and/or Annual Data 2019-2022”, United States 
Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service, 
December 9, 2022, https://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/
supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap

Hawaiʻi Appleseed analysis of data from United 

3. 
States Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition 
Service Reaching Those in Need: Estimates of State 
SNAP Participation Rates, FY 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 
2017, and 2018

Cunnyngham, K., “Reaching Those in Need: 

4. 
Estimates of State Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program Participation Rates in 2018,” Mathematica 
Policy Research, Contract No. 12-3198-20-F-0051. 
United States Department of Agriculture Food 
and Nutrition Service, May 2021, https://fns-prod.
azureedge.us/sites/default/files/resource-files/
Reaching2018.pdf

Cronquist, K., and Eiffes, B., “Characteristics 

5. 
of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
Households: Fiscal Year 2020,” Mathematica Policy 
Research, Contract No. 12-3198-21-F-0034, United 
States Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition 
Service, June 2022, https://fns-prod.azureedge.us/sites/
default/files/resource-files/Characteristics2020.pdf

6. 
Spoto, D., Thornton, G., Lacaden, E., Woo, N., & 
Ly, J., “Feeding our Kūpuna,” Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center 
for Law and Economic Justice, January 2020, https://
hiappleseed.org/publications/feeding-our-kupuna

“State estimates of SNAP participation 

7. 
rates for eligible elderly individuals, FY 2016–FY 
2018,” Mathematica Policy Research, United States 
Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition 
Service, Revised May 2021, https://fns-prod.
azureedge.us/sites/default/files/resource-files/
SNAPElderlyPartRates_2016-2018.pdf

8. 
“American Community Survey, 1-year 
estimates: Data Table SO201,” United States Census 
Bureau, 2021. https://data.census.gov/table?t=002:012
:050&g=0400000US15&y=2021&d=ACS+1-Year+Estimat
es+Selected+Population+Profiles

9. 
Measured by the number of householders 
(formerly termed “head of household”). This chart 
does not necessarily represent the total number of 
individuals who are included in SNAP households.

The “Other Asian Alone” category is defined 

10. 
as: A person having origins in any of the original 
peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the 
Indian subcontinent, including: Chinese, Korean, 
Vietnamese, Thai.

11. 
Note that, while single-race Native Hawaiians 
make up 6.3 percent of Hawaiʻi’s households, Native 
Hawaiians of all race combinations (including those 
of mixed-race descent) account for 15.8 percent 
of the state’s population in terms of householders 
(heads of households).

The “Other Pacific Islander alone” category 

12. 
includes people with origins in Melanesia, Polynesia 
and Micronesia, including the Samoan, Guamanian or 
Chamorro, Fijian, Tongan and Marshallese peoples.

13. 

Cooper, G., & Daws, G., Land and Power in 

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 37

ENDNOTES

Hawaiʻi: The Democratic Years, p. 2, University of 
Hawaiʻi Press, January 1, 1990

will show significantly less than January 2019.”

14. 
“American Community Survey, 1-year 
estimates: Data Table SO201,” United States Census 
Bureau, 2021, https://data.census.gov/table?t=002:012
:050&g=0400000US15&y=2021&d=ACS+1-Year+Estimat
es+Selected+Population+Profiles

21. 
“SNAP Benefits - COVID-19 Pandemic and 
Beyond,” United States Department of Agriculture Food 
and Nutrition Service, October 8, 2021, https://www.
fns.usda.gov/snap/benefit-changes-2021#:~:text=In%20
response%20to%20the%20pandemic,benefit%20
for%20their%20household%20size

15. 
“Real Personal Consumption Expenditures and 
Personal Income by State, 2020,” United States Bureau 
of Economic Analysis, 2021, https://www.bea.gov/
news/2021/real-personal-consumption-expenditures-
and-personal-income-state-2020

“American Community Survey, Language 

22. 
Spoken at Home By Ability to Speak English for the 
Population 5 Years and Over, 2020: 5-Year Estimate,” 
United States Census Bureau, 2022, https://data.census.
gov/table?q=B16001&tid=ACSDT5Y2020.B16001

Mark, J., & Tyndall, J., “Aloha ʻOe: Population 

16. 
Migration Between Hawaii and the U.S. Mainland,” 
University of Hawaiʻi Economic Research 
Organization, August 6, 2020, https://uhero.hawaii.
edu/aloha-oe-population-migration-between-
hawaii-and-the-u-s-mainland

“Household Pulse Survey - Food Scarcity,” 

17. 
United States Census Bureau, Weeks 41 and 48, 2022, 
https://www.census.gov/data-tools/demo/hhp/#/?s_
state=00015&periodSelector=48

“Do You Need Help in Another Language?” 

23. 
Hawaiʻi State Department of Human Services, 2022,  
https://humanservices.hawaii.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2022/03/LEP-insert-Template-with-DHS-
Assistance-Line-Number1.pdf

“DA BUX Double Up Food Bucks 2020-

24. 
2021 Outcomes Report,” The Food Basket Inc., 
July 2022, https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/5bca7bc67eb88c2e986a5203/t/62f6dc8f8e3f8d
1a809e2e9a/1660345536073/2020-2021_Outcomes_
Report_0.9.8.pdf

“2-1-1 Counts,” Aloha United Way, 2022, 

18. 
https://hi.211counts.org

25. 

ibid

“National and/or State Level Monthly and/or 

19. 
Annual Data,” United States Department of Agriculture 
Food and Nutrition Service, 2022, https://www.fns.
usda.gov/pd/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-
program-snap

26. 

ibid

27. 

ibid

28. 

ibid

20. 
As explained by the United States Department 
of Agriculture, “Due to the partial federal government 
shutdown, most of the February 2019 SNAP benefits 
were issued early in the month of January 2019. This 
was done to ensure SNAP recipients would receive their 
February 2019 benefits in a timely manner. As a result, 
January 2019’s benefits will show a significant increase 
over the previous month and February 2019’s benefits 

29. 
“DA BUX Double Up Food Bucks 2022 
Awareness and Usage Report,” Opal Buchtal, DrPH, 
The Food Basket, Inc., October 5, 2022, https://static1.
squarespace.com/static/5bca7bc67eb88c2e986a5203/
t/633e18037567dc3373ebafa1/1665013766100/
Final+Report+10_05_2022.pdf

30. 

ibid

38 • HAWAIʻI SNAP

ENDNOTES

31. 
“Alaska and Hawaiʻi Thrifty Food Plans: Cost of 
Food at Home, June 2022,” United States Department 
of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service, August 
2022, https://fns-prod.azureedge.us/sites/default/
files/media/file/AKHI_June%202022.pdf

Rosenbaum, Dottie, “SNAP’s “Broad-Based 

32. 
Categorical Eligibility” Supports Working Families and 
Those Saving for the Future,” Center on Budget and 
Policy Priorities, July 30, 2019, https://www.cbpp.
org/research/food-assistance/snaps-broad-based-
categorical-eligibility-supports-working-families-and 

33. 
“HHS Poverty Guidelines for 2022,” United 
States Department of Health and Human Services 
Office of the Assistant Secretary For Planning and 
Evaluation, 2022, https://aspe.hhs.gov/topics/poverty-
economic-mobility/poverty-guidelines

“Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
34. 
(SNAP) Eligibility and Access,” United States Census 
Bureau, August 17, 2021, census.gov/library/
visualizations/interactive/snap-eligibility-access.html

35. 
“Understanding Supplemental Security 
Income (SSI) Overview – 2022 Edition,” Social Security 
Administration, 2022, https://www.ssa.gov/ssi/
text-over-ussi.htm#:~:text=Social%20Security%20
benefits%20may%20be,a%20family%20member’s%20
prior%20work

“Biden-Harris Administration National Strategy 

36. 
On Hunger, Nutrition, and Health,” p. 10, The White 
House, September 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2022/09/White-House-National-
Strategy-on-Hunger-Nutrition-and-Health-FINAL.pdf

“Census Microdata: 2020 5-year estimates,” 

37. 
United States Census Bureau, 2022, https://data.
census.gov/mdat/#/

Publishing Office, 2022, https://www.govinfo.gov/
content/pkg/USCODE-2011-title21/html/USCODE-
2011-title21-chap13-subchapI-partD-sec862a.htm

Thompson, D., & Burnside, A., “No More 

39. 
Double Punishments: Lifting the Ban on SNAP and 
TANF for People with Prior Felony Drug Convictions,” 
The Center for Law and Social Policy, April 19, 2022, 
https://www.clasp.org/publications/report/brief/no-
more-double-punishments/

40. 
“Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes § 346-53.3 (2022) 
- Temporary assistance for needy families and food 
stamps for individuals with a felony conviction which 
has as an element the possession, use, or distribution 
of a controlled substance,” Justia US Law, 2022, 
https://law.justia.com/codes/hawaii/2022/title-20/
chapter-346/section-346-53-3/

“Statistical Information Packet - Fiscal Year 
41. 
2021 District of Hawaii,” United States Sentencing 
Commission, 2022, https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/
files/pdf/research-and-publications/federal-sentencing-
statistics/state-district-circuit/2021/hi21.pdf

“Compact of Free Association Act of 1985,” 

42. 
U.S. Department of the Interior Office of Insular 
Affairs, January 14, 1986, https://www.doi.gov/oia/
about/compact

“Micronesians in Hawaiʻi: Compacts of Free 

43. 
Association (COFA)”, Research Guides at University of 
Hawaiʻi at Mānoa, June 7, 2022, https://guides.library.
manoa.hawaii.edu/c.php?g=105631&p=686651

44. 
“Compacts of Free Association: Populations in 
U.S. Areas Have Grown, with Varying Reported Effects,” 
Report to the Chairman of the Committee on Energy 
and Natural Resources, U.S. Senate, United States 
Government Accountability Office, June 2020, https://
www.gao.gov/assets/gao-20-491.pdf

“Denial of Assistance and Benefits for Certain 
38. 
Drug-Related Convictions - 21 U.S.C. § 862a,” United 
States Code 2011 Edition, United States Government 

“H.R.3734 - 104th Congress (1995–1996): 

45. 
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 

HAWAIʻI SNAP • 39

ENDNOTES

Reconciliation Act of 1996,” United States Congress, 
2022, https://www.congress.gov/bill/104th-congress/
house-bill/3734

52. 
Vollinger, Ellen, “Close SNAP Benefits Gaps,” 
Food Research & Action Center, November 17, 2021, 
https://frac.org/blog/close-snap-benefit-gaps

46. 
Spoto, D., Thornton, G., Lacaden, E., Woo, N., & 
Ly, J., “Feeding our Kupuna,” Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center 
for Law and Economic Justice, January 2020, https://
hiappleseed.org/publications/feeding-our-kupuna

53. 
Hartline-Grafton, H., & Vollinger, 
E.,“Legislative Action to Improve SNAP Benefit 
Adequacy,” Food Research & Action Center, June 14, 
2021, https://frac.org/blog/legislative-action-to-
improve-snap-benefit-adequacy

“Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 

47. 
(SNAP) Fiscal Year 2022 Maximum Allotment Amounts 
for Alaska, Hawaiʻi, Guam, and U.S. Virgin Islands,” 
United States Department of Agriculture Food and 
Nutrition Service, October 1, 2021, https://fns-prod.
azureedge.us/sites/default/files/media/file/FY22-
Allotments-AKHIGUVI%20reviewed.pdf

Jones, Ty, “SNAP’s Excess Medical Expense 

48. 
Deduction: Targeting Food Assistance to Low-Income 
Seniors and Individuals with Disabilities,” Center on 
Budget and Policy Priorities, August 2014, https://
www.cbpp.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/8-20-
14fa.pdf

“The Food Stamp Dependent Care Deduction: 

49. 
Help for Families with Child Care Costs,” Center on 
Budget and Policy Priorities, March 2010, https://www.
cbpp.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/3-23-10fa.pdf

“SNAP and the Thrifty Food Plan,” United 

50. 
States Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition 
Service, November 21, 2022, https://www.fns.usda.
gov/snap/thriftyfoodplan

51. 
“SNAP – Fiscal Year 2023 Cost-of-Living 
Adjustments,” United States Department of Agriculture 
Food and Nutrition Service, 2022, https://fns-prod.
azureedge.us/sites/default/files/resource-files/snap-
fy-2023-cola-adjustments.pdf#page=4

Hartline-Grafton, H., & Vollinger, E.,“Legislative 

54. 
Action to Improve SNAP Benefit Adequacy,” Food 
Research & Action Center, June 14, 2021, https://frac.
org/blog/legislative-action-to-improve-snap-benefit-
adequacy

55. 
“USDA Food Plans: Cost of Food Reports 
(monthly reports),” United States Department of 
Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service, 2022, https://
www.fns.usda.gov/cnpp/usda-food-plans-cost-food-
reports-monthly-reports

“Hawaii State Salaries Public Employees Salary 

56. 
Database,” Honolulu Civil Beat, May 24, 2022, https://
www.civilbeat.org/projects/public-employee-salaries/

“Application Timeliness Federal Fiscal Year 

57. 
2020,” Hawaiʻi State Department of Human Services, 
2022, https://humanservices.hawaii.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2020/08/Application-Timeliness-FFY-2020.pdf

“Application Timeliness Federal Fiscal Year 

58. 
2021,” Hawaiʻi State Department of Human Services, 
2022, https://humanservices.hawaii.gov/bessd/
files/2021/06/Application-Timeliness-FFY-2021.pdf

“Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 

59. 
Inquiry Report on Findings & Recommendations,” 
Hawaiʻi Alliance for Community-Based Economic 
Development, April 2018, https://www.hacbed.org/
snap-inquiry

40 • HAWAIʻI SNAP