Title: Policy in Perspective 2023
Date: unknown
URL: https://hiappleseed.org/publications/policy-in-perspective-2023
PDF: https://hiappleseed.org/s/Policy-in-Perspective_2023_FINAL.pdf
============================================================

H AWA I‘I   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

POLICY

I

N

PERSPECTIVE

LOOKING FORWARD FROM THE 2023 STATE LEGISLATIVE SESSION

 
H AWA I‘I   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

Hawaiʻi Appleseed envisions a Hawaiʻi that puts its people first—a Hawaiʻi where everyone can meet their 
basic needs while living happy, healthy and creative lives. We advocate for economic justice for and with 
Hawaiʻi’s people.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary

Key Takeaways 

Affordable Housing
•  Policy Priorities
•  Change Analysis
•  Next Steps

Anti-Hunger
•  Policy Priorities
•  Change Analysis
•  Next Steps

3

4

5
7
8
10

11
13
14
15

Labor & Wages
•  Policy Priorities
•  Change Analysis
•  Next Steps

Tax & Budget
•  Policy Priorities
•  Change Analysis
•  Next Steps 

Endnotes

16
17
18
19

20
22
22 
23

24

Copyright © 2023 Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice. All rights reserved. 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1180, Honolulu, HI 96813

2 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

HAWAIʻI APPLESEED IS COMMITTED to a more 
socially and economically just Hawaiʻi, where everyone 
has genuine opportunities to achieve economic 
security and fulfill their potential. Our theory of change 
involves conducting data analysis and research to 
address economic inequality, educating policymakers 
and the public, engaging in collaborative problem 
solving and coalition building, and advocating for 
policy and systems change. It is through that lens 
that we evaluate each legislative session—an annual 
window of opportunity to impact state law with 
policy that addresses inequality and fosters greater 
opportunity for all of Hawaiʻi’s people.

The 2023 legislative session was the first to include the 
outsized wave of new lawmakers who came into office 
just after the most recent reapportionment process, a 
decennial shakeup of political boundaries. It was also 
the first session with the Green Administration helming 
the state’s executive branch, and without now-Lt. 
Gov. Sylvia Luke chairing the powerful House finance 
committee. Other longtime lawmakers were tapped for 
executive branch positions or resigned due to scandal. 
The high volume of turnover may have adversely 
impacted management of the legislative process—
particularly the already chaotic conference committee 
step. Many widely-supported bills that were expected 
to pass were, instead, left on the table.

Another major factor that impacted the tone of the 
2023 legislative session was the state’s revenue 
forecast going into the session. In January, the state’s 
Council on Revenues was projecting a budget surplus 
of $2 billion that lawmakers would have to work 
with, which likely impacted the lens through which 
many tax and budget proposals were viewed. By the 
halfway point of the session, in March, the council 
had downgraded its prediction by more than $300 
million, which changed the way these proposals were 
framed by lawmakers yet again.1 This shifting budget 

landscape is a common variable that often complicates 
advocacy efforts. While the legislature made significant 
progress in supporting working families as they 
struggle with Hawaiʻi’s high cost of living by expanding, 
again, the state Earned Income Tax Credit,2 it did not 
act on generating new, consistent, equitable sources of 
revenue through higher taxes on corporations and the 
super wealthy. 

Nevertheless, the legislature did direct, over the next 
two fiscal years: 
• 

$827.6 million toward programs to create housing 
and mitigate houselessness;
$175.9 million for healthcare and wellness;
$52.4 million for early learning; and 
$284 million to address climate change and 
ecosystem degradation. 

• 
• 
• 

As the Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center concluded in 
its analysis of the fiscal biennium 2024–2025 budget,3 
many of these investments are critical for Hawaiʻi’s 
future. However, the legislature also chose to bank $1 
billion into the Emergency Budget Reserve, or rainy day 
fund. As lawmakers who ended up voting against the 
2023 budget bill noted:4 for many of their constituents 
it’s raining right now, and that’s money that should 
have been used to provide relief today.

While external factors are certainly important in 
shaping the outcome of each legislative session, 
the continuing importance of centering impacted 
communities through our “people first” approach is a 
constant, essential ingredient to success. No matter 
what the budget outlook is, or which lawmakers chair 
which committees, advocacy efforts are only successful 
when they are backed by the people. In this report, 
we provide key takeaways from our advocacy in 2023 
before diving into detail about the efforts behind 
each Hawaiʻi Appleseed issue focus area: affordable 
housing, anti-hunger, labor & wages, and tax & budget.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 3

KEY TAKEAWAYS

1.

2.

3.

Impacted communities should drive the policy discussion. People-first policy means, of course, policy 
that prioritizes the health, well-being and happiness of the people of Hawaiʻi. But to achieve policy that 
truly places the needs of the people first, that policy must come up through the community from the very 
people that policy would impact. Too often, even the most well-intentioned advocate or policymaker will 
propose a top-down policy solution that may not fully understand the true needs of the community. Such 
policy can have unintended consequences and can serve to undercut community trust in policymakers 
and in government itself. Of the coalitions Hawaiʻi Appleseed facilitates, the most successful in carrying 
forward bold policy ideas in 2023 were the coalitions with the capacity to facilitate a true grassroots process, 
in which people with genuine lived experience of the problems we are attempting to solve were able to 
participate and help shape proposed policy solutions. 

Including people with lived experience in this process not only ensures that the coalition’s policy priorities 
are in-line with the actual needs of the community, it also helps to nurture a powerful base of support 
among the community. This base is then capable of mobilizing wider community support for these policy 
priorities when the time comes to submit testimony, meet with policymakers, or attend a rally or action. 
Investing in the capacity to facilitate this people-first approach to problem-solving and coalition-building by 
including directly impacted communities from the bottom up is key to success.

Messaging should focus on shared values and what we can achieve together through policy. The most 
successful communications messaging focuses on what we have in common with one another—a shared 
local identity and local values; the same wants and basic needs—and then ties those common experiences 
to a concrete vision of what a better future could look like if certain policies are adopted. This is particularly 
important in communicating to the public the importance of tax and budget policy, a technical topic that 
can be hard for people that aren’t experts to engage with. But just about everyone can understand the need 
for good schools, resilient infrastructure, a clean environment and truly affordable housing. Focusing on 
the vision of a Hawaiʻi where these visceral needs are fully satisfied makes it easier to concretely show the 
otherwise more abstract need for tax policy that can adequately fund it.

Identify areas of alignment with policymakers early on. Conversations with policymakers should begin 
before session, and should focus on getting to know the priorities of key legislators to identify areas of 
alignment early on and build collaborative relationships. The issue of tax credits for working families has 
become a strong issue area of alignment between key lawmakers and economic justice advocates such as 
Hawaiʻi Appleseed, and working together on this important working families issue has created a level of 
collaboration that made advocating for back-to-back expansions to the Earned Income Tax Credit in 2022 
and 2023 not just possible, but a stated priority for the Speaker of the House from the outset of the 2023 
legislative session.

4 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

AFFORDABLE HOUSING

Summer-Lee Yadao 
speaks in support of the 
conveyance tax increase 
at a Working Families 
Coalition rally in March, 
2023. // Stacy Iler

There is growing consensus that we need bold new approaches to address our lack of affordable housing, and 
the inhumane reality that thousands of Hawaiʻi residents are currently living unsheltered throughout the state. 
More lawmakers are embracing the concept that our housing policy should better reflect the values of Hawaiʻi. 
That means everyone deserves to have safe and affordable housing, regardless of their life circumstances or 
income. That means that access to housing should be considered a basic human right similar to healthcare, 
clean water and quality education.  

This is an important and much needed mindset shift because, if our housing shortage is ever going to be 
successfully addressed, doing so will require significant investment of public resources. That means investment 
in infrastructure such as roads, water and electricity, as well as in the construction of new affordable housing and 
in the preservation of existing stock. But it also means investment in rent assistance for lower-income residents, 
and in social workers and other staff to offer supportive services for those who need it. 

In an excellent first step toward this mindset shift, the legislature passed a supportive housing pilot project that 
provides funding for supportive staff and rent assistance to help people emerging from homelessness to get back 
on their feet and stay housed. This is a much more practical and realistic approach than simply offering someone 
an apartment without access to professional support to get their lives back on track. 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 5

AFFORDABLE HOUSING

2023 investment: $150 million 
Nets 900 units, 20% of annual need

Required annual investment: $667–834 million 
Nets 4,000–5,000 units per year, 100% of need

The question is whether the State of Hawaiʻi is moving fast enough for the scale of the problem we are facing. Is 
$150 million for affordable housing construction, $5 million for a supportive housing project and $6 million for 
rent assistance enough for the number of residents who need help and can’t afford to continue to live in Hawaiʻi? 
Unfortunately, it’s not. The $150 million for affordable housing construction will likely support the building of 900 
affordable homes across the state. The most recent state housing study indicates that we should be funding the 
construction or acquisition of 4,000–5,000 affordable units per year.5 We are reaching around 20 percent of the 
goal with this year’s investments. 

A bill to reform the state conveyance tax—a one-time tax on the sale of property—so that it would collect 
hundreds of millions of dollars in new revenue by targeting the tax toward the sale of luxury property was 
intended to further us toward that goal, but did not pass. Creating a new source of permanent funding is key to 
moving housing policy forward because it reduces the risk for affordable housing developers who plan projects 
years in advance and require certainty of funding to reduce both risk and costs. It also enables service providers 
to hire new staff (you can’t do that reliably with only a year or two of funding at a time) and increase capacity to 
provide desperately-needed services. 

Another bill would have helped prevent people from sliding into houselessness by funding emergency rental 
relief and eviction mediation services. Every dollar spent on eviction prevention saves the state $6 on homeless 
services. Each year, roughly 2,500 evictions take place across our state, costing the public $30 million each year.6 
The human and social costs of losing one’s housing is even higher. While this bill also did not pass, it nearly did—
and the support it received from lawmakers shows the progress being made in this mindset shift.

6 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

Simply OrganizedSimply OrganizedSimply OrganizedSimply OrganizedSimply OrganizedSimply OrganizedSimply OrganizedSimply OrganizedSimply OrganizedSimply OrganizedAFFORDABLE HOUSING

POLICY PRIORITIES

HB1439/SB393: Rent Assistance & Eviction Prevention 

This bill was modeled after a successful pandemic pilot program aimed at preventing evictions that Hawaiʻi 
Appleseed research helped to craft. HB1439 made it all the way to the very last day of the conference committee 
process. However, conferees could only agree on funding the mediation program ($1.25 million of the $14 million 
requested), not the rent assistance component. Ultimately, the bill died as a result. 

The effort around this bill brought together mediation centers and rent assistance providers, as well as tenants 
and landlords, from across the state to advocate for effective eviction prevention methods. Additional research 
from the Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center also helped to educate the public about the high cost of eviction. This 
heightened public awareness about the need for mediation and rent assistance likely contributed to the final 
2024–25 state fiscal biennium budget including a huge increase in funding for a state rent assistance program—
from $500,000 per year to $6 million in Fiscal Year (FY) 2024. This is the first significant increase in a state-funded 
rent assistance program (separate from COVID-19 rent assistance) in at least a decade.

We are hopeful that increasing awareness about the effectiveness of early eviction prevention through 
mediation—that takes place before any case is filed in court and before there are any lawyers involved—coupled 
with access to rent assistance, will translate into a successful bill in 2024. 

SB362: Conveyance Tax 

SB362 made it through three of its required four committees, but ultimately was not given a hearing in the House 
Committee on Finance. Committee Chair Kyle Yamashita expressed a desire to consider conveyance tax increases 
as part of a larger tax reform effort in a subsequent session. Hawaiʻi Appleseed analyses7 estimated that this 
enhanced conveyance tax would increase:
• 
• 
• 

The Rental Housing Revolving Fund from $38 million to $150–200 million annually; 
The Land Conservation Fund from $5.1 million to $30–40 million annually; and
The new Homeless Services Fund from $0 to $30–40 million annually.

At the beginning of the 2023 session, it seemed unlikely that a bill expanding the conveyance tax would pass. 
Attempts in the past had gone mostly nowhere. However, the concept of permanent new funding for homeless 
services and affordable housing through a sales tax on homes selling for multi-millions of dollars proved to be a 
compelling issue for the Hawaiʻi Housing Affordability Coalition (HiHAC), for the public, and in the media. 

In the clearest sign of support for the concept, dozens of houseless community members showed up to testify 
in support of the issue, despite the many barriers they face to participation in the policymaking process. Sadly, 
legislators did not get to hear from these testifiers because the hearing they showed up to testify for ran over 
time. Between SB362 and an earlier, more robust bill, SB678, the conveyance tax issue generated far more 
supportive testimony overall (over 90 pages) than any other housing bill during the 2023 session. The reason 
this issue got so far is because of the support from members of the public—particularly from those with lived 
experience of houselessness.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 7

AFFORDABLE HOUSING

HB1397: Supportive Housing Pilot

HB1397 establishes a supportive housing pilot program in the Hawaiʻi State Office of Homelessness and 
Housing Solutions to provide and maintain affordable housing opportunities and supportive services for certain 
individuals and families with special needs earning 0–30 percent Area Median Income (AMI), as well as 80–120 
percent AMI. This bill was passed and signed into law by Governor Josh Green as Act 95 on 06/21/2023. 

HB1397 represents a significant investment in creating new affordable housing opportunities at 0–30 percent AMI 
by offering “rent vouchers” and staff support. Specifically, the bill appropriates: 
• 
• 
• 

$1,740,000 for rent supplement payments (so tenants won’t have to pay for their own rent); 
$2,784,000 for supportive services; and 
$467,000 for a new supportive housing information system.

SB363: Rent Reporting and Credit Building

SB363 would have created a program that all renters in Hawaiʻi could access and use to build up their credit 
scores with rent payments. This program would be extremely low-cost, requiring only about $200,000 per year 
to set up and manage. The bill made it through its first committee, the Senate housing committee, but failed 
to receive its next assigned hearing before a joint Committee on Commerce & Consumer Protection and Ways 
& Means. Despite this, it was only the first year this type of publicly-sponsored program, made available to all 
Hawaiʻi renters, had been proposed. Perhaps the concept will make it further next year. 

HB1338: Tenant’s Bill of Rights

HB1338 did not receive a single hearing, but it was an extremely ambitious bill that brought forward a wide array 
of tools to provide renters with greater housing stability. The bill was a recognition of the fact that, even as we 
work to build more affordable housing, we also need increased protections for the tens of thousands of Hawaiʻi 
residents struggling to survive and stay housed in the “Renters Wild West.” 

CHANGE ANALYSIS

People First/Organizing 

During the 2023 legislative session, Hawaiʻi Appleseed was just beginning to build its staff capacity 
to engage in community outreach, engagement and organizing. The trust-building that is required 
before people impacted by housing insecurity and houselessness feel comfortable sharing their 
stories with us is already substantial. Getting them to feel confident enough to share their story with a 
committee chair is even harder. 

However, existing Hawaiʻi Appleseed staff pitched in to dedicate multiple hours, including several 
trips to Kauaʻi and Maui, to engage houseless community members there. These efforts were housed 
within HiHAC, and began the process of building trust and, going forward with new staff members 
and resources, we hope they will catalyze future legislative advocacy from the very people lawmakers 
need to hear from most. 

8 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

AFFORDABLE HOUSING

Research/Data 

Research on both the conveyance tax and eviction prevention issues was undertaken with support 
from key contractors. HBPC produced a report on the costs of eviction to back-up the eviction 
prevention bill with data on the need for the program, while raw data on housing sales in the state 
was essential to making the case for conveyance tax reform.

Coalitions/Relationships

The HiHAC coalition’s ability to connect with people with lived experience of housing insecurity and 
houselessness, and to provide space for them to lead the policy prioritization process translated into 
highly-successful mobilization efforts. The conveyance tax bills increase, for example, was the second 
most testified on housing policy in 2023 with the highest rate of supportive testimony to opposition. 
Dozens of people currently experiencing houselessness testified or tried to testify on the issue. The 
fact that the issue did not make it to the conference committee step underscores the need to also 
build relationships with legislative leadership that can allow for better collaboration on the issue of 
finding consistent, large sources of tax revenue to invest into affordable housing and houselessness.

Communications/Media

The conveyance tax and eviction prevention issues recieved solid media coverage throughout the 
2023 legislative session. Articles written included:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

“Property sale tax could create $2.1 million for Kauaʻi homeless”
“Bill to increase conveyance tax on Hawaiʻi homes will potentially fund homeless services”
“Proposed tax increase to fund homeless services not likely to advance in legislature”
“While a tax hike to fund homeless services may not pass, housing advocates have a plan”
“Tax to fund affordable housing advances in state legislature”
“Hawaiʻi taxpayers are paying a high cost for evictions”
“Covid has slowed but Hawaiʻi still needs rent assistance”
“Luxury home sales tax to fund affordable housing killed”
“Bill creating a luxury home sales tax to fund homeless services misses key deadline”
“Housing advocate calls for a departure from the status quo to meet basic needs”
“State funds for late rent, mediation to be revisited”
“Mediating rent disputes”
“In Hawaiʻi’s housing crunch, tenants are vulnerable to rent hikes and evictions”

The media coverage was helpful in educating the public and keeping its attention focused on these 
issues. With the spotlight on these issues, advocates had a pretext to make literature drops at the 
offices of key lawmakers and provided a context within which to have brief conversations with staff, 
reinforcing the attention and pressure on the issue. 

Working with HiHAC, Hawaiʻi Appleseed created several videos in support of both the conveyance 
tax issue and the eviction prevention issue. The videos were posted to social media, and the eviction 
prevention video was boosted on YouTube and Facebook to more than 25,000 viewers. While HiHAC 
lacked its own social media presence during the 2023 legislative session, we have since created social 
media pages for the coalition to host and spread its content and messaging.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 9

AFFORDABLE HOUSING

NEXT STEPS

“IT IS ENTIRELY POSSIBLE TO CREATE THE HOUSING SUPPLY WE NEED TO 
MEET OUR DEMAND WHILE MAINTAINING IMPORTANT PROCEDURAL, LEGAL, 
ENVIRONMENTAL, CULTURAL, AND PUBLIC HEALTH REGULATIONS. THE KEY TO 
BRINGING DOWN COSTS IS PUBLIC INVESTMENT.”

The narrative around housing needs to shift for both the public and lawmakers to one that centers ongoing 
and permanent sources of public funding to finance a variety of methods for creating affordable housing units. 
Narratives about solving the problem through the gutting of important regulations alone should be pushed 
back on. This narrative is cover for profit-driven development to expand its own bottom line. And as long as 
the motive is profit, such a strategy will continue to fail to create housing at costs that actually meet our needs. 
It is entirely possible to create the housing supply we need to meet our demand while maintaining important 
procedural, legal, environmental, cultural, and public health regulations. The key to bringing down costs is public 
investment.

Members of the public that wish to get involved can attend HiHAC meetings every first Thursday of the month. 
You can sign-up for the HiHAC mailing list here, or email info@hihac.org for more information.

10 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

ANTI-HUNGER

Hunger continues to be a major issue in Hawaiʻi, where the cost of food on a thrifty budget is some 80 percent 
higher than the average on the continent—the highest food costs in the United States.8 Vulnerable populations, 
including keiki and kupuna, are at particular risk of being food insecure. 

To address this critical issue, the Hawaiʻi Hunger Action Network (HHAN) piloted some ambitious new initiatives 
this year that it had not pushed in prior years, including universal free school meals, expanded state benefits for 
SNAP users, and Department of Education (DOE) school food services reforms. Another issue HHAN championed 
this year for the first time was the push to create a state Child Tax Credit (CTC), marking the first time local anti-
hunger advocacy groups/orgs have organized advocacy efforts around “upstream” solutions to food insecurity. 

At the same time that the coalition was pushing for new, innovative solutions, however, longstanding, successful 

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 11

ANTI-HUNGER

programs that have been proven to increase nutrition security and food access for vulnerable populations, and 
that have received overwhelming community and legislative support, died unexpectedly during the conference 
committee step of the 2023 legislative session. That includes two coalition priorities (DA BUX and foodbank 
funding) that the food security community have been advancing for years. 

While this was a frustrating result for anti-hunger efforts in 2023, the results do not necessarily indicate that these 
programs are no longer supported within the legislature. The conference committee process, by many accounts, 
was particularly chaotic this past legislative session, and these important anti-hunger bills weren’t the only 
ones to slip through the cracks. With people’s health, wellness and livelihoods on the line with these programs, 
lawmakers should act swiftly in 2024 to ensure these measures pass and are signed into law right away.

Several other factors impacted the 2023 session’s anti-hunger efforts, including:

•  New funding for additional anti-hunger policy positions within a cohort of four organizations, including 

Hawaiʻi Appleseed, resulting in greater momentum for several initiatives within this focus area; 

•  Hawaiʻi’s “30 percent by 2030” farm-to-school goal, passed into law in 2021 (HRS 302A-405.5 & 405.6), 

continues to dominate the conversation around child food access; and  

•  DOE leadership remains focused on centralized kitchens as a strategy for school food reforms, planning to 

build a $35 million facility in Wahiawā. This has put other important school food reforms on the back burner 
for lawmakers. 

Although none of the bills the HHAN coalition advocated for this year made it through the process, the coalition’s 
efforts kickstarted a conversation that will continue into the next session, and inspired new food security 
champions to get involved.

12 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

ANTI-HUNGER

POLICY PRIORITIES

HB247, HB248, HB249, HB250: DOE Reforms

This suite of DOE reforms that would have made accessing nutritious meals through schools easier for Hawaiʻi’s 
keiki died after the halfway point in the session when bills crossed over to their non-originating chambers.

HB1248: Funding for the SNAP Double Up Food Bucks (DA BUX) Program 

This program provides a state match in purchasing power when SNAP benefits are used by recipients on local 
food products. The program is extremely popular with SNAP users, distributors and local food producers. The bill 
to fund the program crossed over and passed all its committees before it died in conference committee. 

HB314: Food Bank Funding 

This bill would have provided funding to the state emergency food access program, but died in conference 
committee on the last day of session. The failure to pass this bill has had major consequences on Maui in 
the wake of the August 2023 wildfires that destroyed Lahaina town, killed some 100 people, and displaced 
thousands. In an age of increasing danger from climate change-fueled catastrophes, this underscores the need 
for the state to keep its emergency programs—including emergency food relief—properly funded.

SB430: Farm-to-Food Bank Funding

This farm-to-food bank program that strengthens local food production and food security also crossed over, 
passed all committees and died in conference committee on the final day of negotiations.

HB233: Child Tax Credit

This bill would have created a state child tax credit—or Keiki Credit—to provide families with economic support 
to raise families in Hawaiʻi where the costs for raising kids is significantly higher than on the continent. As an 
“upstream” solution to food insecurity, this credit would help keep keiki fed. The bill made it through all its 
committees but died during the conference committee process. (More on this bill in the Tax & Budget section)

SB154, HB540: Universal Free School Meals

This proposal would have guaranteed school meals to every Hawaiʻi public school student regardless of ability 
to pay, and was an ambitious anti-hunger proposal that managed to build momentum through the session as 
the issue gained traction among the public and in national media. Several other states have now signed bills 
from their 2023 legislative sessions into law creating universal free school meal programs. In Hawaiʻi, both bills 
crossed over, but then died in their non-originating chambers.

HB740, SB940: Expanded Benefits for SNAP Recipients

These bills to strengthen the benefits provided by SNAP in Hawaiʻi died in their originating chambers and did not 
cross over.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 13

ANTI-HUNGER

CHANGE ANALYSIS

People First/Organizing 

Hawaiʻi Appleseed and HHAN are committed to ensuring the voices of those most impacted by 
hunger and food insecurity are centered and supported. While capacity for community engagement 
and organizing was limited during the 2023 session, additional capacity through a new staff position 
will give Appleseed and HHAN the opportunity to engage the community through community 
listening and base-building sessions during the fall of 2023 and into the 2024 legislative session.

Research/Data

Data was critical to advocating for anti-hunger initiatives during the 2023 legislative session. 
From sharing the number of SNAP participants in Hawaiʻi losing benefits with the ending of SNAP 
emergency allotments, to estimating the cost to the state for universal free school meals—legislators 
relied on data provided by Appleseed and HHAN to help craft and improve introduced legislation.

Coalitions/Relationships

With renewed coordination and facilitation support, HHAN set an ambitious policy agenda 
encompassing upstream and downstream approaches to address food and nutrition insecurity. 
HHAN members were supported with data and talking points to submit oral and written testimony in 
support of more than 10 bills that spanned four priority areas. HHAN members received timely action 
alerts to encourage advocacy and keep advocates informed of critical legislative updates.

Communications/Media

Hawaiʻi Appleseed’s and HHAN’s policy priorities received earned media from multiple news outlets:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

“Inside the push to make school meals free in Hawaiʻi” 
“DOE hopes a $35M kitchen in Wahiawa will improve school lunches”
“Hawaiʻi families are on the edge of a hunger cliff”
“Bills to transform Hawaiʻi school meals die in Senate”
“Lack of leadership hurts farm to school”
“Food and farming advocates look to state budget after mixed results this session”

In addition, utilizing social media, HHAN engaged community members to advocate for multiple anti-
hunger priorities. Since the end of the 2023 session, HHAN has expanded its social media capacity 
and launched a brand new website to help coordinate advocacy.

14 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

ANTI-HUNGER

NEXT STEPS

The food access and nutrition security bills proposed by HHAN during the 2023 legislative session were well-
coordinated and strategically aimed to address the varied needs of Hawaiʻi’s food insecure communities. The 
coalition will continue to advocate for these evidence-based, well-tested food access strategies that are so 
desperately needed in Hawaiʻi. In addition to legislative advocacy, HHAN will continue to work with local and 
state partners to improve administration of and access to food assistance programs as well. 

Sign up to join the Hawaiʻi Hunger Action Network email list here to connect with local anti-hunger advocates 
and stay updated on advocacy opportunities that advance nutrition security and food access for Hawaiʻi’s 
people.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 15

LABOR & WAGES

Christen Zulli speaks in 
support of paid family 
leave and paid sick leave 
at a Working Families 
Coalition rally in March, 
2023. // Stacy Iler

Hawaiʻi made a significant stride forward in 2022 with the passage of a law raising the minimum wage to $18 an 
hour by the year 2028—raising the incomes of some 200,000 low-wage workers by a total of $1 billion in higher 
wages each year.9 But even that progress isn’t enough to overcome the high cost of living in Hawaiʻi, and workers 
continue to be vulnerable to the impacts of missed work for illness or to care for a loved one or child. There is a 
clear and immediate need for stronger safety net programs for workers and their families to help cope with the 
cost of caring for loved ones while missing work. 

In particular, a paid family leave and paid sick leave program for workers would each increase economic stability 
for the workforce, businesses and the overall economy. Hawaiʻi Appleseed participated in the Hawaiʻi Working 
Families Coalition and Raise Up Hawaiʻi Coalition efforts around both programs, submitting testimony and 
helping to coordinate communications and logistics for a Working Families Coalition rally at the capitol that 
featured low-wage workers and their families speaking in support of these measures. 

Despite these efforts, advocates were not able to overcome opposition from the state’s own Department of Labor 
& Industrial Relations, the executive department that would be responsible for administering the proposed 
programs, as well as from the business lobby, which continues to block any labor policies that would change 
the current dynamic between employers and employees—even when research shows these policies strengthen 
businesses too.10 

16 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

These policies are more complex than a comparatively straightforward minimum wage increase. It will be 
important to educate both community members and lawmakers to build the necessary support, both inside 
and outside of the Capitol, to get these policies implemented. We must demonstrate that, like so many things, 
investing the upfront cost of funding these programs will be well-worth the long term savings and economic 
multiplier effects that these programs generate by strengthening the workforce. The improved quality of life, 
reduced healthcare costs, reduced unemployment costs, reduced eviction costs, and economic stimulus of a 
strengthened working class will pay for these programs many times over.

Lawmakers did make some progress by strengthening Hawaiʻi’s salary transparency law to improve gender 
equity.

POLICY PRIORITIES

SB270: Tip Credit Phase-Out

This bill started out as a proposal to phase-out the tip credit, a harmful policy that allows certain employers in 
the service industry to pay a sub-minimum wage to their workers, as long as these workers are earning a certain 
amount in tips. There is strong evidence to suggest that employers are routinely failing to properly assess the 
tip credit, paying the subminimum wage even when their workers are not earning the necessary amount in tips 
required by law.11 This means the tip credit is, in fact, a tip penalty for many workers. Beyond that, workers that 
are forced to work for tips to account for a portion of their basic needs income are at higher levels of risk of 
workplace abuse from both employers and customers. 

Despite strong arguments for the harm this “tip penalty” does to workers—while padding the profit margins of 
business owners—the Senate labor committee chair chose to turn the proposal into a study. The amended bill 
crossed over to the House where advocates asked the House labor committee chair to turn the bill back into its 
original form. Instead, the bill was allowed to die.

HB235/SB342: Paid Sick Leave

These bills were the preferred vehicles for paid sick leave from the Working Families Coalition. On the Senate 
side, SB342 was also turned into a study by the Senate labor chair. The House labor chair never scheduled HB235 
for a hearing.

HB236/SB360: Paid Family Leave

These bills were the preferred vehicles for paid family leave from the Working Families Coalition. The House labor 
committee chair did not schedule HB236 for a hearing and allowed it to die, while—once again—the Senate labor 
committee chair turned SB360 into a study. Two studies have already been carried out by the state on the topic 
of how to implement a successful paid family leave program in Hawaiʻi. When the bill crossed over to the House 
labor committee, advocates therefore had strong reason to push for this bill to be turned back into its original 
form as well, but the chair deferred the measure instead.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 17

LABOR & WAGES

SB1057: Strengthening Salary Transparency

This bill was signed into law as Act 203 on 7/03/2023. Effective January 1, 2024, job listings in Hawaiʻi (with 
certain exceptions) will be required to include an hourly rate or salary range that reasonably reflects actual 
expected compensation. Employers will be prohibited from discriminating between employees because of any 
protected category established under state law by paying wages at a rate less than the rate at which the employer 
pays wages to other employees for substantially similar work. Fairly small, but important distinctions in the 
language used in this updated salary transparency law will make big differences in advancing gender equity in 
the workplace.

HB1087/SB1385: Closing the Minimum Wage Law Loophole

Both bills advanced throughout the session without opposition. The measures, advanced by the Green 
Administration, were understood to be essentially procedural in that they were simply making a small fix to the 
existing law. By the time the conference committee period came around, it was the Senate version that was 
chosen to be the final vehicle. However, like many other measures that were expected to pass as a matter of fact, 
the bill was allowed to fall through the cracks during the chaos of the conference committee process.

CHANGE ANALYSIS

People First/Organizing 

Mobilizing working families to support policy at the legislature is a constant challenge because of the 
barriers they face to participation in the policymaking process. Most working parents cannot take off 
work to testify in person, and even submitting written testimony can be a major challenge when time 
as a parent is limited and precious. However, mobilizing this constituency to participate is essential 
to winning on labor and wages, or the voices of the business lobby will continue to drown out the 
needs of the people. Strategic partnerships with orgnanizations that have capacity to organize this 
critical constituency will become increasingly important as working families continue to struggle with 
the high cost of living in Hawaiʻi.

Research/Data

Hawaiʻi Appleseed relied on national research in testimony to show how paid family leave and paid 
sick leave programs benefit businesses and the economy. Recent Hawaiʻi data collected on worker 
stats was also included. Likewise, Appleseed relied on national data to show the harm the “tip 
penalty” causes to workers, and the benefits to everyone involved in phasing it out.

Coalitions/Relationships

The Raise Up Hawaiʻi coalition is experiencing some growing pains as it transitions from a purely 
minimum wage increase-focused coalition to a broader labor issue-focused coalition. Personnel 
changes in the past two years mean Hawaiʻi Appleseed no longer has a labor and wages policy expert 

18 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

LABOR & WAGES

or coalition coordinator, which limited capacity to primarily a supportive role.

The Working Families Coalition made both paid family leave and paid sick leave priorities, but—with 
the exception of the Hawaiʻi Children’s Action Network, which organizes parents and families to 
support issues like paid family leave and paid sick leave—most of the organizations in the Working 
Families Coalition are focused primarily on grasstops advocacy. While that is also needed, the effort 
to build engagement with impacted community members to turn out mobilization for policy change 
efforts needs to be supported and expanded.

Communications/Media

In a similar vein, our communications and messaging competency around these non-wage specific 
labor issues is on a learning curve. The looming cost of living crisis and the difficulty it creates in 
caring for family and health continues to drive the need for these programs, and presents a clear case 
to be made for the public and lawmakers. Additional messaging around the ability of these programs 
to also strengthen businesses and the overall economy, and to make both more resilient could help 
nurture support among the business community. The following media hits captured work around the 
labor and wages issue in 2023:
• 
• 
• 

“Salary transparency can promote economic justice”
“As Hawaiʻi’s minimum wage rises, some lawmakers want to scrap the tip credit”
“Working families rally at the Hawaii state capitol for paid family leave, affordable housing, and 
paid sick days”
“Following Labor Department pushback, paid family leave proposal dies”

• 

NEXT STEPS

Policymakers need to hear from working parents if we are to secure people-first labor and wage policies over 
the objections of hesitant bureaucrats and shortsighted lobbyists. Finding business owners with vision, who 
are supportive of these programs and willing to speak out and challenge the dominance of the business lobby’s 
narrative around labor-related programs, will also make it easier to convince lawmakers that these policies won’t 
result in economic harm—that they will, in fact, strengthen the economy. 

Getting the major labor unions on board with these policies from the start would mean a significant power 
boost in the efforts to advance these policies as well. Meeting with both legislative labor chairs, other interested 
lawmakers, DLIR staff, the governor’s office and other stakeholders to get on the same page about these 
programs ahead of time would help ensure that the next draft bill is feasible given state capacity, while still 
delivering the benefits that workers and their families deserve.

The labor coalitions could organize and hold coalition meetings structured more closely to a HiHAC meeting, 
which is geared toward cultivating grassroots power and building public engagement and mobilization capacity. 
An easy first step is to funnel interested members of the public into a legislator contact form that can allow them 
to send a message of support to their lawmakers ahead of the 2024 session. Sign up to join the Raise Up Hawaiʻi 
email list here.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 19

TAX & BUDGET

Supporters of tax fairness 
initiatives that would 
capture more wealth from 
the rich to help fund our 
collective future gather at a 
press conference in January, 
2023. // Connie Choy

Hawaiʻi continued to make progress in the 2023 legislative session on making its tax system more fair toward 
low-income workers by letting them keep more of what they earn. Tax credits help offset the high cost of living, 
alleviate poverty and stimulate the consumer economy all at the same time. Tax credits are less burdensome to 
apply for than government benefit programs. With the passage of Act 163, Hawaiʻi’s refundable Earned Income 
Tax Credit (EITC) will expand to 40 percent of the federal credit. This gives Hawaiʻi one the strongest EITCs in the 
nation, behind only California, Maryland, and Washington D.C.

Although the EITC expansion is great progress, its benefits still aren’t enough for many families in the state. And 
because the EITC depends on work, not all residents qualify. As another means of delivering a targeted form of 
economic relief to offset the high cost of raising children, in 2023 the Hawaiʻi Tax Fairness Coalition advocated 
for the establishment of a state child tax credit, or Keiki Credit. This credit would deliver an additional economic 
benefit to families with children, regardless of work status, to help cover the cost of things like child care.12 In 
2023, lawmakers left this proposal on the table, but perhaps the dramatic increase in poverty during 2022—
spurred in large part by the end of federal Child Tax Credit expanded benefits13—will change their minds in 2024. 

Governor Josh Green had a great deal of influence on the conversation surrounding tax credits, since he 
proposed his own tax credit plan. The Green Affordability Plan (GAP) both helped and hurt our efforts around 
creating a CTC. The GAP created a lot of buzz around the broader concept of tax credits. However, the sheer 
volume of tax credits being proposed made carving out space for the CTC a challenge.

20 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

44,483

$3,008

$909

3,913

Incomes Less 
Than $400,000

Incomes Over 
$400,000

Incomes Less 
Than $400,000

Incomes Over 
$400,000

Number of Hawai‘i returns with long-
term capital gains, 2020

Dollar value of all long-term capital 
gains ($Millions), 2020

The distribution of returns 
with income from long-
term capital gains and the 
amounts of income reported 
both disproportionately favor 
the wealthiest taxpayers in 
Hawai‘i. These figures include 
data for both resident and 
nonresident taxpayers in 
2020.

On the other side of the tax equation is assessing equitable taxes on corporations and the wealthy to pay for 
the many things Hawaiʻi needs as a collective community to meet the serious challenges of the 21st century. At 
the top of the list is affordable housing, its associated infrastructure costs, and houseless services; anti-hunger 
programs like universal school meals; and economic support programs like the Keiki Credit and paid leave.

In addition to the conveyance tax (see Affordable Housing section), Hawaiʻi Appleseed also supported a proposal 
to change how wealth from capital gains is taxed. Capital gains is wealth created by the selling of capital assets 
like stocks, bonds, art, antiques and real estate. It is wealth held almost exclusively by the top 5 percent of 
Hawaiʻi’s richest households and, therefore, a higher tax on capital gains would almost exclusively impact those 
same wealthy households.14 Hawaiʻi is one of only nine states that taxes capital gains at a lower rate than regular 
income from wages. This policy provides a tax break to the wealthiest among us, and costs the state tens of 
millions of dollars in lost revenue each year. Instead, the state should tax capital gains at the same progressive 
tax rates as regular income from work.

While this proposal was also put forward in 2021 during the height of the pandemic, it was billed, then, as a 
revenue-generating budget deficit solution to help avoid pandemic-related cuts. However, federal relief money 
quickly supplanted the need for bolstered budget revenue from taxes—temporarily. Similarly, a rosy budget 
surplus forecast at the start of the 2023 session led many legislators to discount the idea of implementing 
revenue raising tax proposals such as a progressive capital gains tax. But while federal money may have helped 
stave off a full blown recession, and led to a rosy budget surplus projection, that situation could change given 
external factors like pandemics, supply chain-disrupting wars, or devastating natural disasters.

The 2023 session was the first session that the capital gains proposal was put forward as part of a push to “fund 
our future”—messaging that explicitly recognizes the need for consistent investment of public tax revenue, 
collected equitably, in order to meet our problems head on and overcome them. The campaign was coordinated 
with sister campaigns in states across the country, all championing the same message.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 21

TAX & BUDGET

POLICY PRIORITIES

HB233: Keiki Credit

This bill to establish a state child tax credit advanced all the way to the conference committee but did not make it 
out of the process once the budget was decided on.

HB954: Majority Caucus Tax Relief Bill

This bill expands the state EITC to 40 percent of the federal benefit amount, as well as expanding the child and 
dependent care tax credit and refundable food/excise tax credit. This bill was advanced by the House majority 
caucus and was signed into law by Governor Green as Act 163 on 06/30/2023.

HB232: Taxing Capital Gains Like Ordinary Income

This bill received no hearings, failing to get through the House Committee on Economic Development. A different 
proposal to raise the capital gains tax rate to a higher—but still flat—rate of 9 percent advanced further but was 
still deferred.

CHANGE ANALYSIS

People First/Organizing

As with other issue areas, Hawaiʻi Appleseed continued to develop its capacity to mobilize working 
families to turn out to rallies and lobby days in support of tax policy changes. While we still lack 
dedicated tax and budget organizing staff, our Lead Community Developer, Christy MacPherson, 
continues to be an important resource in facilitating that work. With her efforts, the coalition does 
have a few community leaders that are able to speak at rallies or to the media about the importance 
of tax credits to their family wellbeing. However, more outreach and organizing to strengthen this 
capacity further is likely needed before major tax reforms stand a chance of passage.

Research/Data

Hawaiʻi Appleseed used data from the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy (ITEP) to 
communicate key talking points about tax measures to legislators and their staff. Appleseed created 
two 2023 research products through the Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center—one on the benefits of 
the Keiki Credit, and the other on the benefits of a progressive capital gains tax. Releasing research 
products on the issues we’re advocating for in advance of the legislative session, rather than 
during the session itself, would give lawmakers more time to absorb the information, and provide 
opportunities for follow ups before hearings begin.

22 • POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE

 
TAX & BUDGET

Coalitions/Relationships

Hawaiʻi Appleseed convened the Hawaiʻi Tax Fairness Coalition throughout the session, and 
established new relationships with legislators and advocates. However, the coalition currently 
focuses on grass tops advocates, and would be strengthened by the addition of participation from 
community members outside the tax policy sphere. Securing meetings with key lawmakers ahead 
of the legislative session and introducing these tax concepts with supporting material would help 
lawmakers make better-informed decisions once session starts in January.

Communications/Media

The coalition was able to coordinate a “Fund Our Future” press conference to support the capital 
gains tax proposal, as well as a proposal from a legislative champion to strengthen the estate tax. 
Appleseed also coordinated the placing of an op-ed from our two tax fairness legislative champions 
in the State House in Honolulu Civil Beat. 

As part of the Working Families Coalition rally, Appleseed coordinated speakers to support the Keiki 
Credit and EITC expansion, and placed a Honolulu Star Advertiser op-ed in support of the Child Tax 
Credit and the moms who would benefit from it for Women’s History month in March. Media coverage 
of our tax and budget proposals included:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

“Billionaires in blue states face coordinated wealth-tax bills”
“Hawai'i Tax Fairness Coalition protest at State Capitol in favor of new tax on ultra-wealthy”
“Hawaiʻi bill looks to increase capital gains taxes”
“Want to give our kids a future? Change the way we tax wealth”
“Move ahead with care on tax relief”
“ʻAudacious’ tax relief plan advances at Hawaiʻi Legislature”
“Hawaiʻi’s working moms deserve (child tax) credit”
“Working families need tax relief”

Through the coalition, Hawaiʻi Appleseed generated multiple short videos to promote the Child Tax 
Credit and capital gains tax, which were shared and boosted on YouTube, Facebook, Instagram and 
Twitter, collectively racking up tens of thousands of views.

NEXT STEPS

Hawaiʻi Appleseed should work to expand the Tax Fairness Coalition to include more grassroots community 
members, as well as to reconnect with grass tops members that have not been as involved lately. Awareness 
campaigns to educate the public on tax issues and encourage them to become more involved should be created 
and implemented before the 2024 session begins. It is possible to move the Tax Fairness Coalition towards 
having a more robust and community-centered model, and doing so would allow us to mobilize a much stronger 
presence at the Capitol in support of tax fairness and a budget that invests heavily in people. Sign up to join the 
Hawaiʻi Tax Fairness Coalition email list here.

POLICY IN PERSPECTIVE • 23

ENDNOTES

1. 
Angarone, Ben, “Hawaiʻi’s budget may be 
smaller than expected this year, council says,” Honolulu 
Civil Beat, March 8, 2023, https://www.civilbeat.
org/2023/03/hawaiis-budget-may-be-smaller-than-
expected-this-year-council-says 

Budget & Policy Center, November 2020, p 14,
https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/5ef66d594879125d04f91774/t/5fb30e0e61a94
71eeafb9beb/1605570081213/A+Case+For+Change_
Final2.pdf 

Dayton, Kevin, “Hawaiʻi House and Senate give 

2. 
nod to sweeping tax relief bill,” Honolulu Civil Beat, 
April 28, 2023, https://www.civilbeat.org/2023/04/
hawaii-house-and-senate-give-nod-to-sweeping-tax-
relief-bill

White, Will, “2022 legislative session a big win 

9. 
for working families; more still needs to be done,” 
Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center, May 12 2022, https://
www.hibudget.org/blog/2022-hawaii-legislative-
session-win-working-families

Giesting, Beth, “Hawaiʻi’s Budget in Brief:

3. 
Fiscal Biennium 2024–2025,” Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy 
Center, July 2023, https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/5ef66d594879125d04f91774/t/64a36be03dc81
5332631ac2c/1688431595621/Budget+In+Brief+2023_
FINAL.pdf

4. 
Dayton, Kevin, “Lawmakers end session 
amid criticism of the budget and use of surplus,” 
Honolulu Civil Beat, May 4, 2023, https://www.civilbeat.
org/2023/05/lawmakers-end-session-amid-criticism-
of-the-budget-and-use-of-surplus

5. 
Li, Binsheng, Jie Bai and Wayne Liou, 
“Hawaiʻi Housing Demand: 2020–2030,” Hawaiʻi State 
Department of Business, Economic Development & 
Tourism, December 2019, https://files.hawaii.gov/
dbedt/economic/reports/housing-demand-2019.pdf

6. 
White, Will and Devin Thomas, Abbey Seitz, 
“Keeping Hawaiʻi Housed,” Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy 
Center, March 2023, https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/5ef66d594879125d04f91774/t/63ffb9c590f4690
495401e91/1677703628693/Keeping+Hawaii+Housed_
FINAL.pdf

Analysis conducted by Hawaiʻi Appleseed 

7. 
Center for Law & Economic Justice

Giesting, Beth, “40 Years of Rising Costs and 

8. 
Stagnant Wages: The Case for a New Economy,” Hawaiʻi 

10. 
“Paid Family and Medical Leave: Good for 
Business,” National Partnership for Women & Families, 
September 2018, https://nationalpartnership.org/
wp-content/uploads/2023/02/paid-leave-good-for-
business.pdf

Allegretto, Sylvia and David Cooper, “Twenty-

11. 
Three Years and Still Waiting for Change: Why It’s Time 
to Give Tipped Workers the Regular Minimum Wage,” 
Economic Policy Institute, 2014, https://www.epi.org/
publication/waiting-for-change-tipped-minimum-wage

12. 
White, Will and Devin Thomas, “Investing 
in our Future: A Keiki Credit for Hawaiʻi,” Hawaiʻi 
Budget & Policy Center, Febraury 2023, https://static1.
squarespace.com/static/5ef66d594879125d04f91774/
t/63d9c18fc7866f76f5eec873/1675215250698/
Keiki+Credit+Brief_FINAL.pdf

Thomas, Devin, “Keiki poverty more than 
13. 
doubled last year without the expanded Child Tax 
Credit,” Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center, September 22, 
2023, https://www.hibudget.org/blog/keiki-poverty-
doubled-without-expanded-child-tax-credit

White, Will and Devin Thomas, “Closing 
14. 
the Capital Gains Loophole,” Hawaiʻi Budget & 
Policy Center, January 2023, p 6, https://static1.
squarespace.com/static/5ef66d594879125d04f91774/t/
63c89bc085f4da2e39e2a14e/1674091459114/
Capital+Gains+Policy+BriefFinal.pdf