Title: Renters left behind at the Hawaiʻi State Legislature
Date: unknown
URL: https://hiappleseed.org/publications/renters-left-behind-hawaii-state-legislature
PDF: https://hiappleseed.org/s/Renters-Left-Behind-at-the-Hawaii-Legislature_Report_FINAL.pdf
============================================================

March 2025 

Renters left 
behind at the 
Hawaiʻi State 
Legislature

H AWA IʻI   A P P L E S E E D

CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

www.hiappleseed.org

Author: Arjuna Heim

Hawaiʻi Appleseed is committed to a more socially and economically just Hawaiʻi, where everyone has genuine 
opportunities to achieve economic security and fulfill their potential. We change systems to address inequity 
and foster greater opportunity by conducting data analysis and research to address income inequality, educating 
policymakers and the public, engaging in collaborative problem solving and coalition building, and advocating 
for policy and systems change.

The work of Hawaiʻi Appleseed is about people. The issues we work on—housing, food, wages, mobility, the state 
budget and taxation, and racial and indigenous equity—are important because they ensure people have access 
to shelter, sustenance, and the means to survive and thrive individually and collectively. Addressing these issues 
requires the knowledge and expertise of the people that have first-hand experience and live with the adverse 
consequences of our flawed systems.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary

How Renters Struggle in Hawaiʻi

Renters Issues at the State Legislature

Recommendations 

Endnotes

3

4 

6

9

11

Copyright © 2025 Hawaiʻi Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Justice. All rights reserved. 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1180, Honolulu, HI 96813

2 • RENTERS LEFT BEHIND

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

HAWAIʻI STANDS at a critical juncture. Our existing 
housing policy framework fails to adequately 
address the challenges faced by renters. Recent 
crises such as the Maui Wildfires highlight the 
interconnectedness of our housing ecosystem and 
the urgent need for comprehensive reform. 

In Hawaiʻi, two-fifths (38 percent) of households 
rent the homes in which they live.1 Renters tend 
to be lower on the income scale, and often work 
multiple jobs to support their families and keep a 
roof over their heads. They are usually the ones to 
feel the crunch of Hawaiʻi’s housing market most 
acutely, and this added stress can have serious 
repercussions on health and future earnings. 

Renter instability has serious impacts on our local 
workforce and economy. Maui County and Kauaʻi 
County each have some of the highest median 
rent prices in the country.2 This makes finding a 
home near work difficult for many, which in turn 
has consequences for the local economy. A 2024 
Kauaʻi Council Candidate forum highlighted how 
renters issues are becoming a catalyst for all sorts 
of quality of life issues for residents—not just cost 
of living, but also health, safety and job security.3 

Too often the needs of renters are sidelined at the 
Hawaiʻi State Legislature. In the last five years, bills 
aimed at increasing the supply of housing through 
new development have received strong support 
and seen passage into law. However, with the 
exception of Act 57 (2021) and Act 237 (2022), the 
legislature has failed to pass any bills specifically 
targeting assistance to stabilize renters and keep 
them housed.

•  Act 57 (2021): Signed into law at the peak of 
COVID 19 pandemic, this bill made landlord-

tenant mediation mandatory upon eviction 
filing, and made rent-relief funds available; 

•  Act 237 (2022): This bill increased TANF/TONF 

benefits by $500 for qualifying families that can 
be put toward housing costs.  

Act 57 (2021) became a national model to keep 
renters housed during the pandemic.4 However, 
even though the need for the program persists, 
it was allowed to lapse after the pandemic was 
declared over. The legislature has failed to re-enact 
this popular and effective program year after year.

Our existing statutes don’t do enough to protect 
renters from displacement and instability. Hawaiʻi 
lacks a just-cause eviction requirement, provides 
insufficient rental support, and requires no advance 
notice of lease non-renewal or rent increases. 
Hawaiʻi provides no incentives for landlords and 
tenants to engage in mediation, and there is no 
effective enforcement mechanism for landlord 
violations of the landlord-tenant code.

The absence of a right to counsel perpetuates 
the power imbalance between landlord and 
tenant. Tenants without legal representation face 
significant challenges in contesting illegal evictions 
or displacement. 

Implement just-cause eviction requirements;

To address these challenges, Hawaiʻi must adopt a 
comprehensive set of renter protections: 
• 
•  Provide legal counsel for tenants; 
•  Offer sufficient, accessible rental support;
•  Mandate a 60 day minimum advance notice for 

lease non-renewal or rent increases; and 
•  Create enforcement mechanisms for landlord-

tenant code violations. 

RENTERS LEFT BEHIND • 3

HOW RENTERS 
STRUGGLE IN HAWAIʻI

Figure 1. Percentage of Cost-Burdened Hawaiʻi Renters, 2010–235

Cost-Burdened

Severely Cost-Burdened

53%

50%

49% 50%

52% 52% 51% 51%

53%

52%

51%

48% 49%

2010 2011

2012

2013

2014 2015

2016 2017 2018 2019 2021 2022 2023

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Figure 1. To be cost 
burdened means a 
household is spending 
30 percent or more 
of its income on 
rent. Severely cost 
burdened means 
a household is 
sepending more than 
50 percent of its 
income on rent. Since 
2010, roughly half of 
Hawaiʻi’s total renter 
population has been 
either cost burdened 
or severely cost 
burdened.

Renters in Hawaiʻi face significant cost burdens and limited protection from displacement. Hawaiʻi 
renters are often evicted or forced to self-evict under a range of circumstances.6

A National Low Income Housing Coalition (NLIHC) snapshot of the cost of renting in Hawaiʻi done in 
2023 shows that 38 percent of residents are renters, with 21 percent earning low incomes and 36 percent 
earning extremely low-incomes.7 More than half (51 percent) of all renters now spend more than 30 
percent of their income on rent, making them “cost-burdened.” Furthermore, 26 percent of all renters are 
“severely cost burdened,” which means they spend more than 50 percent of their income on rent.8

Displacement and housing instability have profound consequences for individuals and families beyond 
the obvious financial burden. Studies show that housing instability is also linked to increased stress, 
anxiety, and depression, all of which can deteriorate both mental and physical well-being.9 Chronic 

4 • RENTERS LEFT BEHIND

HOW RENTERS STRUGGLE

stress from the fear of eviction or the inability to secure stable housing has been found to exacerbate 
preexisting health conditions, as well as contribute to the development of new ones, such as heart 
disease, respiratory issues, and other chronic ailments,10 as some renters choose to postpone medical 
services to pay for rent. 

For children, housing instability can also lead to interruptions in education, with frequent moves 
resulting in lower academic performance, increased absenteeism,11 and problems with social, emotional 
and physical development.12 

Hawaiʻi’s high housing costs and comparatively low wages, coupled with low levels of protection 
for renters, has left a very large portion of our residents vulnerable to displacement and the social 
disruption, detrimental health outcomes, economic insecurity and, in extreme but not infrequent cases, 
homelessness that can accompany it.13 14

Impacts of the Maui Wildfires

In addition to the tragic loss of more than 100 lives, the Maui Wildfires devastated 2,207 
structures. Some 86 percent of these structures were residential, including an 89 unit affordable 
rental housing project that Hawaiʻi Appleseed worked with residents and local attorneys to 
keep affordable.15 Prior to the 2023 Maui Wildfires, Hawaiʻi was already the 4th most expensive 
state for renters.16 The loss of these housing units displaced thousands of Lahaina residents and 
exacerbated an already dire situation for Maui County.

In the aftermath of the fires, policies designed to rehouse displaced residents led to 
unintended consequences.17 The Federal Emergency Management Agency’s generous rental 
assistance—$5,000 per studio unit and up to $11,000 a month for a four-bedroom18—doubled the 
market rate for most rental units.19 This pushed the rental market beyond the reach of current 
residents across the county, forcing them to either leave their homes or pay exorbitant new 
market prices.20

While the aid benefited those directly affected by the fires, renters who were not directly 
impacted now face an increased risk of displacement.21 The vulnerability of Maui County’s 
struggling, wider renter population underscores the urgent need for legislative intervention to 
protect renters and ensure the availability of affordable housing options. Without a significant 
increase in housing units and improvements in housing affordability, the housing market will 
continue to exclude working-class people across Hawaiʻi.

During the 2024 legislative session, members of the Maui delegation introduced numerous 
bills aimed at regulating the rental market, including proposals for rent price restrictions and 
mediation requirements. 

RENTERS LEFT BEHIND • 5

RENTERS ISSUES AT THE 
STATE LEGISLATURE

The landlord-tenant law in the Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes is limited in protections against displacement. 
Enforcement of the landlord-tenant code favors landlords implicitly by not providing tenants with a 
guaranteed right to counsel. Rental assistance is limited and can’t always cover the necessary funds to 
bridge a gap in rent owed versus cash available. 

The majority of Hawaiʻi’s rental assistance programs in existence today feature a number of barriers 
tenants must overcome, have a long waiting period, or require showing that the tenant is homeless or 
about to become homeless to qualify. With just a five-day eviction notice required for non-payment of 
rent, there is almost no time for renters to access, or qualify for temporary assistance.

6 • RENTERS LEFT BEHIND

RENTERS ISSUES

The 2024 legislative session had the potential to produce statutes that could have increased renter 
stability. However, of the 37 applicable bills introduced in 2024, only two made it to the governor’s desk, 
and both were aimed at assisting landlords, rather than stabilizing tenants in their homes. 

•  SB2834 (Act 33) established a process whereby a landlord could dispose of and repossess a dwelling 

unit when a tenant passes away. 

•  SB2132 (Act 32) amends the deadline related to repairing of unsafe housing conditions and increases 

the amount deducted from tenants rent for the expenditures made to correct such conditions. 

Best Practices for Tenant Protections

The NLIHC has published multiple reports on efforts to further increase the security of renters. 
Lack of federal tenant protections means that states must legislate these protections to avoid 
harmful power imbalances between landlords and tenants. In the “State of Statewide Renter 
Protections” (2023), the NLIHC found that across the U.S. there are five common types of state-
level protections to support housing stability and prevent harmful evictions:

1.  Right to Counsel: Ensures that tenants facing eviction are guaranteed legal representation in 
court, helping to prevent unjust evictions and ensuring fair legal proceedings for renters who 
cannot afford an attorney. 

2.  Just Cause Eviction: Mandates that landlords can only evict tenants for specific, 

documented reasons (such as non-payment of rent or lease violations), rather than at the 
landlord’s discretion. This offers greater protection against capricious displacement. 

3.  Source of Income Discrimination: Prohibits landlords from refusing to rent to potential 

tenants based on their source of income, such as relying on government subsidies or housing 
vouchers. This ensures equitable access to housing for low-income individuals. 

4.  Eviction Record Sealing and Expungement Laws: Allow individuals with eviction records to 
have their records sealed or expunged after a certain period, providing a second chance and 
helping to reduce barriers to securing future housing. 

5.  Anti-Rent Gouging: Imposes restrictions on how much landlords can increase rent, 

particularly during emergencies or periods of high demand, to protect tenants from excessive 
rent hikes.

Hawaiʻi currently has in effect a source of income discrimination law on the books. However,  it 
exempts property owners who own less than four units, making it overly narrow in scope. 

RENTERS LEFT BEHIND • 7

RENTERS ISSUES

Figure 2. Landlord-Tenant Code and Tenant Benefit Bills in the Hawaiʻi State Legislature, 2019–24

No Hearing

Deferred

Conference

Law

0

5

10

15

20

25

Landlord-Tenant Code (2019)

Tenant Beneﬁt (2019)

Landlord-Tenant Code (2020)

Tenant Beneﬁt (2020)

Landlord-Tenant Code (2021)

Tenant Beneﬁt (2021)

Landlord-Tenant Code (2022)

Tenant Beneﬁt (2022)

Landlord-Tenant Code (2023)

Tenant Beneﬁt (2023)

Landlord-Tenant Code (2024)

Tenant Beneﬁt (2024)

For the analysis in this report, Hawaiʻi Appleseed looked at all landlord-tenant related bills introduced 
since the 2019 legislative session, and broke them into two categories:22  

•  General landlord-tenant code changes, some which include reduction of tenants rights. 
•  Policy that benefits tenants through expansion of tenant rights via the landlord-tenant code.

We tracked the course of each bill through the legislative session to determine what happened to the 
measure and converted the data into the graph detailed in Figure 2.  

In addition, in 2023 Governor Josh Green signed an emergency proclamation enacting a temporary 
eviction moratorium in the aftermath of the Maui Wildfires. The proclamation was almost unenforceable, 
as tenants must know their rights and have means to access legal services in order to make use of it. 
Renters on Maui have continued to face eviction, either formally or informally.

8 • RENTERS LEFT BEHIND

RECOMMENDATIONS

Hawaiʻi's existing statutes do not provide sufficient protection against displacement. There are no just-
cause eviction requirements, little if any rental support, no advance notice of lease non-renewal or rent 
increases, and no accessible resources for mediating landlord-tenant disputes. Furthermore, there is 
no effective enforcement mechanism for violations of the landlord-tenant code. The absence of a right 
to counsel exacerbates these issues. Tenants without legal representation face significant challenges in 
contesting illegal evictions or displacement. 

Hawaiʻi needs a comprehensive revision of its landlord-tenant code. A robust renters' rights policy is 
essential for ensuring tenants live in safe, fair, and secure housing. Such a policy should include:

1.  Access to Legal Resources: Information and support for tenants to understand and be able to 

exercise their rights. 

2.  Protection Against Unlawful Eviction: Legal processes for evictions, protection against retaliatory 

actions, and access to contest eviction notices. 

3.  Transparent and Fair Leasing Practices: Clear lease agreements, fair rent increase regulations, and 

procedures for lease termination. 

4.  Privacy and Respect: Reasonable notice before landlord entry and prohibition of harassment. 

5.  Fair Rent Practices: Regulated rent increases and clear communication of changes. 

6.  Security Deposits: Fair handling of deposits, including clear procedures for interest, deductions, as 

well as returns. 

7.  Non-Discrimination: Enforcement of anti-discrimination laws in rental practices. 

8.  Support for Vulnerable Populations: Additional protections for low-income renters, seniors, and 

individuals with disabilities. 

9.  Right to Safe and Habitable Housing: Ensuring properties meet health and safety standards, with 

mandatory repairs and inspections.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

Applicability: To construct a fair and equitable landlord-tenant code of conduct around just cause 
evictions, the policy should apply to any rental agreements with a minimum lease of six months, and for 
holdover tenants from a previous lease agreement, statewide.

RENTERS LEFT BEHIND • 9

RECOMMENDATIONS

Just Cause: The policy should require that documented just cause be required for evictions. Just cause 
should include: non payment of rent, substantial damage to the premises, threatening injury or injuring 
others on premise, reckless endangerments, material violation of lease, repeat violation after receipt 
of proper notice of violation, nuisance disturbance or negligent damage to property, property damage, 
failure to disclose sex offender status, sexual advances or harassment of owner or manager or other 
tenants, and threats to landlord. 

No Fault Cause: The policy should provide that tenants cannot be held at fault in the event of demolition 
or conversion of residential premises, substantial repair or renovation, documented need for landlord 
or landlord’s family member to assume occupancy, selling of home, notice of non renewal of lease by 
landlord under 90 days, or notice of rental increase under 60 days. 

Relocation Assistance: In the event of demolition or conversion of residential premises, the policy 
should require relocation assistance to supplement renters previous housing costs up to six months, and 
for all other no fault cause one month’s rent for relocation assistance or waiver of the final month of rent.

Enforcement: Effective enforcement of these protections ensures that these policies are actively 
implemented, preventing exploitation and further displacement. Enforcement mechanisms should 
include regular inspections, clear reporting procedures, and accessible legal support.

Right To Counsel: When facing eviction, just 4 percent of tenants are represented by counsel as opposed 
to 83 percent of landlords. Across the country there are approximately 24 jurisdictions that have enacted 
tenant right-to-counsel measures, with reported positive outcomes that maintain tenant occupancy and 
limit no-fault evictions. 

In Oklahoma, Massachusetts, California, Minnesota and Denver, Colorado, studies consistently show 
that tenants with legal counsel are significantly more likely to retain their housing or receive more time 
to find alternative accommodations. Specifically, legal representation increases the odds of staying in 
a home by up to 75 percent, with some studies revealing that fully represented tenants are three times 
more likely to stay in their units, and therefore avoid homelessness. Additionally, tenants with counsel 
tend to have cleaner eviction records, which can help avoid future housing instability.23 

These findings underscore the need for a right to legal representation in eviction proceedings, as it 
ensures tenants have a fair opportunity to remain in their homes, access sufficient time to relocate, and 
avoid the long-term negative consequences of eviction. Providing legal assistance to tenants can prevent 
displacement, reduce homelessness and promote housing stability. 

Hawaiʻi can create a more equitable rental market, ensuring that all residents—particularly those most 
in need—have access to safe and affordable housing. Addressing these gaps will not only support renters 
but also contribute to a more stable housing market overall, benefiting the community as a whole.

The 2025 legislative session offers another opportunity to pass sensible landlord-tenant code reform 
around just cause eviction, right to counsel, and extended notice. Without comprehensive reforms, we 
risk further social and economic disruptions, along with enduring health consequences for Hawaiʻi’s 
most vulnerable populations.

10 • RENTERS LEFT BEHIND

 
 
 
ENDNOTES

U.S. Census Bureau, “American Community 

1. 
Survey Table S1101: Households and Families,” 
2023, https://data.census.gov/table/ACSST1Y2023.
S1101?q=Hawaii%20Housing

Tyndall, Justin et al., “The Hawaiʻi Housing 

2. 
Factbook,” University of Hawaiʻi Economic 
Research Organization, 2024. https://uhero.
hawaii.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/
HawaiiHousingFactbook2024.pdf

Azambuja, Léo, “Kauai Council Candidates 

3. 
Agree County Can’t Ignore Housing Crisis,” Honolulu 
Civil Beat,  October 10, 2024. https://www.civilbeat.
org/2024/10/kauai-council-candidates-say-the-
county-cant-afford-to-ignore-housing-crisis

4. 
Fujii-Oride, Noelle, “Why Rent Relief in 
Hawaiʻi Became a National Model,” Hawaii Business, 
June 13, 2022. https://www.hawaiibusiness.com/
hawaii-rent-relief-national-model-covid-housing-
state-legislative-subcommittee 

U.S. Census Bureau, “American Community 

5. 
Survey Table B25070: Gross Rent as a Percentage 
of Household Income in the Past 12 Months,” 2023. 
https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDT1Y2023.
B25070?q=b25070%20hawaii

Legal Services Corporation, “LSC Eviction 

6. 
Laws Database,” 2021. https://www.lsc.gov/
initiatives/effect-state-local-laws-evictions/lsc-
eviction-laws-database#pt-12

7. 
National Low Income Housing Coalition, “Out 
of Reach: Hawaii Dashboard,” 2024. https://nlihc.org/
oor/state/hi

8. 

U.S. Census Bureau, “Table B25070,” 2023

9. 
Giesting, Beth, “Good Health Depends on 
Decent Housing,” Hawaiʻi Budget & Policy Center, 
December 2021. https://static1.squarespace.
com/static/601374ae84e51e430a1829d8/t/6
5b1c5e7ba03db650a747ce8/1706149351596/
Health+%26+Housing+Handout.pdf

Meltzer, Rachel and Alex Schwartz, “Housing 

10. 
Affordability and Health: Evidence From New York 
City,” Housing Policy Debate, 26(1), 80–104, 2015. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10511482.2015.1020321

Ziol-Guest, Kathleen and Claire McKenna, 

11. 
“Early childhood housing instability and school 
readiness,” Child Development, 85(1), 103–113, 
March 27, 2013. https://srcd.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1111/cdev.12105

Holtz, Casey, Robert Fox and John Meurer, 
12. 
“Incidence of behavior problems in toddlers and 
preschool children from families living in poverty,” 
The Journal of Psychology, 149(2), 161–174, March 4, 
2014. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080
/00223980.2013.853020

Collinson, Robert et al., “Eviction and 
13. 
Poverty in American Cities,” The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 139(1), 57–120, February 2024. https://
doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjad042

Bauman, Tristia, Michael Santos et al., 

14. 
“Protect Tenants, Prevent Homelessness,” 
National Law Center on Homelessness & Poverty, 
2018, https://homelesslaw.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/10/ProtectTenants2018.pdf

Meierdiercks, Janis, “Lost in the Lāhainā 

15. 
Fire: A New Affordable Housing Complex,” 
Hawaii Business, August 15, 2023. https://www.

RENTERS LEFT BEHIND • 11

ENDNOTES

hawaiibusiness.com/lahaina-fire-takes-new-
affordable-housing-complex-maui

16. 

National Low Income Housing Coalition, 2024

17. 
Dobbyn, Paula, “Renters Fear Unintended 
Consequences Of Tax Breaks To Help House Maui 
Fire Survivors,” Honolulu Civil Beat, December 
15, 2023. https://www.civilbeat.org/2023/12/
tax-incentives-and-fema-perks-add-to-long-term-
renters-agony-on-maui

Hawaiʻi State Department of Human Services, 

18. 
“State of Hawaiʻi Department of Human Services 
Launches $2.5M Rental Assisstance Program,” 
December 1, 2023. https://humanservices.hawaii.
gov/state-of-hawaii-department-of-human-services-
launches-2-5m-rental-assistance-program

Tyndall, Justin et al., “The Hawaiʻi Housing 

19. 
Factbook,” University of Hawaiʻi Economic 
Research Organization, 2023. https://uhero.
hawaii.edu/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/
TheHawaiiHousingFactbook.pdf

Garnham, Juan Pablo and Arjuna Heim, 

20. 
“Climate Disasters Are an Affordable Housing 
Problem,” Bloomberg, August 16, 2024. https://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-08-16/maui-
wildfires-show-climate-disasters-are-an-affordable-
housing-problem

List, Madeleine, “These Maui Tenants Didn’t 

21. 
Lose Their Homes In The Fire, But They’re Still Being 
Displaced,” Honolulu Civil Beat, August 29, 2023. 
https://www.civilbeat.org/2023/08/these-maui-
tenants-didnt-lose-their-homes-in-the-fire-but-
theyre-still-being-displaced

This filtering did not capture two pieces 
22. 
of legislation which were beneficial to tenants; 
increase in TANF/TONF rental assistance and non 
discrimination of rent.

23. 
National Coalition for a Civil Right to 
Counsel, “The Right to Counsel for Tenants Facing 
Eviction: Enacted Legislation,” December 2024. 
https://civilrighttocounsel.org/wp-content/
uploads/2023/11/RTC_Enacted_Legislation_in_
Eviction_Proceedings_FINAL.pdf

12 • RENTERS LEFT BEHIND