As federal support fades, farm to families could fill the gap


Genevieve Mumma


With federal cuts threatening key nutrition programs, Hawaiʻi’s food banks are preparing for a crisis. The Emergency Food Assistance Program (TEFAP) and other federal programs are at risk. With millions of dollars in federal food shipments canceled, the stability of emergency feeding programs across the state is under threat and local food banks are scrambling to fill the gap. Now, more than ever, investing in local food systems through programs like Farm to Families is a necessary strategy to build Hawaiʻi’s economic resilience and reduce food insecurity.


Federal Funding Threats
For years, Hawaiʻi’s food banks have relied heavily on federal support to provide a significant portion of funds for operations and food supply:
* The Food Basket, which serves Hawaiʻi Island, sources about half of its operational funding from federal sources, with nearly a quarter of its food federally supplied.
* The Maui Food Bank receives about $1.7 million worth of food from the USDA, in addition to around $50,000 a year in federal funding.
* According to the Hawaiʻi Foodbank, which sources food for Oʻahu and Kauaʻi, federal programs provided $6.6 million worth of food last year, accounting for about 22 percent of the value of all food distributed.


One federal program—covering $2.8 million worth of food for Oʻahu and Kauaʻi—is funded by the Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) which has supplied emergency food to food banks across the country. Just last month, CCC funds were axed at the U.S. Department of Agriculture, halting millions of dollars worth of deliveries nationwide, despite higher food prices and increased need. In Hawaiʻi, if CCC-funded food (including frozen chicken, pork, and eggs) is not replaced, the total annual impact will be a loss of $4 million statewide, as reported by the Hawaiʻi Foodbank. 


Additionally, amidst continuing high demand, around $500,000 worth of donated goods to Hawaiʻi have been cut from TEFAP without explanation. The USDA also halted new funding for the Local Food Purchase Assistance Cooperative Agreement (LFPA) program, leaving future funding uncertain. Hawaiʻi’s current $3.2 million contract remains in place to fund produce box distribution through July.


Local-Focused Solution: Farm to Families
Hawaiʻi’s food banks are the backbone of our emergency food distribution system. Yet, even as local governments rely heavily on them during times of crisis, food banks are almost exclusively funded through private donations and grants. The good news is that the state is moving forward with a creative solution—an initiative known as “Farm to Families. This initiative would provide public funding for food banks to purchase directly from local farmers and producers, making it a win for local producers, families and the economy. 


House Bill (HB) 428 is heading toward a conference committee hearing later this month. The bill would establish the Farm to Families program in the Hawaiʻi Department of Agriculture and provide funding. The House Committee on Agriculture and Food Systems is requesting $2 million dollars to support the program, offering a sustainable way to mitigate federal losses by redirecting resources toward Hawaiʻi-grown food. Rather than relying on vulnerable federal supply chains, this initiative strengthens relationships between local farms and food assistance programs, ensuring that fresh, nutritious and culturally-significant food reaches families in need while keeping money circulating in the local economy


House Committee on Agriculture & Food Systems Chair Kirstin Kahaloa framed it this way:


"When we invest in local agriculture, we boost our economy, create sustainable opportunities, and mālama ʻāina—steward our land to preserve it for future generations. By nourishing our keiki and families, we strengthen and uplift our entire community.”


As federal cuts threaten the stability of Hawaiʻi’s food banks, investing in local food systems through programs like Farm to Families offers a resilient, homegrown solution. We applaud our state leaders for prioritizing HB428, and for their commitment to strengthening Hawaiʻi’s communities and local food systems for generations to come. 


Ask your lawmakers to support HB428. You can do that using the Hawaiʻi Hunger Action Network’s simple legislator contact tool here.