Hawaiʻi’s keiki are still waiting for universal free school meals…the time to act is now.
Hunger affects every aspect of a child’s life, from their health to their ability to focus and succeed in school. Research shows that consistent access to nutritious meals improves both academic performance and long-term health. Yet, in 2023, 6 percent of Hawaiʻi households with children had one or more children go a whole day without food. 
Meals are more than just nutrition—they are an essential school supply. Ensuring that every student has access to the nutrients necessary for optimal learning is a critical step in helping to close achievement gaps. In public testimony last year, one public school teacher put it this way: 
“We saw how free meals helped our students. If you are hungry, the last thing on your mind is learning how to read, do math, or work positively with your peers. It is long past time to level the playing field and provide healthy school meals to our haumana [students].” 
To date, no one in Hawaiʻi has gone on record opposing universal free school meals. But for the past 4 years in a row, our state leaders and lawmakers have neglected to prioritize this service, citing budget and capacity constraints. In that time, inflation has risen and child food security has just gotten worse. 
While some newer state proposals are calling for a partial expansion of the free meal program, there is a significant risk that many children would still be left behind. Challenges like language barriers, difficulty providing paperwork, and fear of disclosing information already result in many children who are eligible simply falling through the cracks. One study even found that 34 percent of students who were denied free or reduced price meals were actually eligible to receive them. The only way to make sure every child is reached is to eliminate the need to apply. 
We propose just giving our students the nutrition they need. This is what House Bill 757, introduced by Representative Scot Matayoshi. This is also what the people of Hawaiʻi are asking for; according to a recent public poll, 82 percent of voters are in support of this proposal.
The truth is that free school meals would cost around $26 million per year—only 1.2 percent of the HIDOE's annual budget. Compare this with the $656 million the state will lose as a result of last year’s tax cuts, or the $279 million the state could raise by imposing progressive taxes on the sale of mansions. 
Free school meals are not only a smart investment in our students, but also an opportunity to put money back into the pockets of Hawaiʻi families—money they could be using on other expenses and that could be supporting our local economy. This is not a crisis of budget—it is a crisis of priorities.
Eight states have already passed legislation that would deliver healthy school meals to all children, and the trend is spreading. Although federal child nutrition programs are safe from the recent attempt to freeze federal funding, the threat of federal instability remains. States are already bracing for proposed cuts and restrictions, including one that would take away free meals from 52 participating Hawaiʻi schools and over 27,000 students.
Ensuring universal free school meals isn’t just about feeding children—it’s about investing in their future and the future of our communities. Hawaiʻi has the resources to make this a reality. What’s missing is the political will. As other states take action, Hawaiʻi has the opportunity to do the same and commit to a program that guarantees every child the nutrition they need to learn, grow, and thrive.
Get involved:
Join us Saturday, March 15 for a community forum to discuss school meals for all.
Sign the petition to ask our leaders to support #Meals4allHI, and visit hiappleseed.org/universal-free-school-meals for more information.