Hawaii Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice
Page  of                                                                                                         


Testimony of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice
Support for HB 1896 – Relating to Community Schools
House Committee on Finance
Tuesday, March 3, 2026, at 2:00PM
                                                                                                                


Dear Chair Todd, Vice Takenouchi, and members of the Committee:
Hawaiʻi Appleseed supports HB 1896, which would appropriate funds to the Department of Education for community schools and a program manager position. 
Public schools are one of the most critical community-oriented institutions we have as a society. The community schools movement seeks to intentionally integrate schools into their surrounding communities, giving parents, families, and other members of the community a place to learn and connect with one another. This is absolutely critical in a time where so many are socially isolated, and political differences have driven wedges into nearly every corner of society. 
Community Schools partner with community organizations, families, and other agencies to advance student outcomes by integrating student supports, active family and community engagement, collaborative leadership practices, and expanded learning time. Educators may work with partners such as local companies, nonprofits, and higher education institutions to offer students real-world projects that make learning more relevant and engaging. They build connections that can open the door to future opportunities. 
Furthermore, this strategy is crucial for building community disaster resilience, as seen during the global COVID pandemic. Community Schools are able to mobilize their community in times of uncertainty or hardship, through well-established partnerships built on trust. These partnerships can often ensure that basic needs, and other necessities are still available to those who need them. 
Please support this bill to sustain the community schools movement in Hawaiʻi and organize our resources towards the success of students, families, and communities. 






________________


The Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice advocates for economic justice for and with Hawaiʻi’s people. We envision a Hawaiʻi that puts its people first—where everyone can meet their basic needs while living happy, healthy and creative lives. 
.